2 Let Savitar approve aspot upon the earth for thy remains :
And let the bulls be yoked for it. & Let Vayu purify. Let Savitar purify, With Agni’s glitter. With Savitar’s lustre. Let the bulls be unyoked.
4 Oy Fig Tree is your home, your mansion ia the Parna 28: Winnors of cattle shall ye be if ye regain for me this man.
5 Let Savitar lay down thy bones committed to the Mother's lap. Be alana to this man, O Earth.
6 Here in the God Prajapati, near water, Man, I lay thee down: May his light drive mishap from us.
7 Go hence, O Death, pursue thy special pathway apart from that which Gods are wont to travel. To thee I say it who hast eyes and hearest: Touch not our offspring, injure not our heroes,
8 Pleasant to thee be wind and eun, and pleasant be the bricks to thee. Pleasant to thee be the terrestrial fires : let them not scorch thee in their flames.
9 Prosper for thee the regions and the waters, and let the seas for thee be most propitious. Auspicious unto thee be Air. Prosper all Quarters well for thee!
10 On flows the stony flood: hold fast each other, keep your- selves up, my friends, and pass the river. Here let us leave the powers that brought no profit, and cross the flood to Powers that are auspicious,
11 Drive away evil, drive away fault, sorcery, and guiltiness. Do thou, O Apamarga, drive the evil dream away frum us.
12 To us let waters and the plants be friendly, to him who hates us, whom we hate, unfriendly,
13 For our prosperity we touch the ox the son of Surnbhi. Be bearer aud deliverer to us as Indra to the Gods.
14 Looking upon the loftiest light, etc., as in XX. 21.
15 Here I erect this rampart for the living: let none of these, none other, reach this limit. May they survive a hundred lengthened autumns, and may they bury Death beneath this mountain.
16 Agni, thou pourest life, ete., as in XIX. 38.
17 Waxing with sacrifice live long, O Agni, with butter on thy face and homed in fatness, When thou hast drunk the cows’ fair savoury butter, guard, asa father guards his son, these people.
18 These men have led about the ox, have duly carried Agni round, And raised their glory to the Gods. Who will attack them with success ?
19 I drive Corpse-eating Agni to a distance: sin-laden let him go to Yama’s kingdom. Here let this other, Jatavedas, carry oblation to the Deities, foreknowing.
20 Carry the fat to Fathers, Jatavedas, where, far away, thou kuowest them established. Let rivulets of marrow flow to meet them, and let their truthful wishes be accomplished. All-hail!
21 Pleasant be thou to us, O Earth, without a thorn, our rest- ing-place. Vouchsafe us shelter reachivg far. May thy light drive mishap from us.
