Far hath he shone abroad like gold to look on, beaming im- perishable life for glory. Agni by vital powers became immortal when his prolific . Father Dyaus begat him. :
: ther, suckle one same infant, : Golden between the heaven and earth he shineth, The .  wealth-possessing Gods aupported Agni. 5 :
3 The Sapient One arrays himeelfin every. form : for,quadrup- ed and biped be hath brought forth goud. Excellent Savitar. bath looked on. heaven’s high vault:: he shineth: after the outgoings of the Dawn. :
4 Thou art the goodly-pinioned Bird : thou hast the Trivrit for * thy head. Giyatra is thine eye, thy wings are Brihat and Rathantara. ~ The hymn is solf, the metres ara hia limbs, the formulas his name. ‘The Vamadevya Siman is thy form, the Yajfiiyajiiya thy tail, the fire-hearths are thy hooves. Thou art the goodly-pinioned Bird: go skyward, soar to heavenly light, 5. Thou aet the rival-slaying stride of Vishnu. Mount the Gayatra metre : steide along the earth. Thou art the foe-destroying stride of Vishyu. Mount the Trishtup metre : stride along mid-air. Thon art the traitor-slaying stride of Vishnu. Mount the Jagati metre: stride along the sky. Thou art the fooman-slaying stride of Vishnu. Mount Anush- tup metre : stride along the Quarters, .
6 Agni roared out like Dyaus what time he thunders: full oft the earth round plants he flickered. At once, when born, he Tooked about, enkindled: he shineth forth between the earth and heaven.
7 Return to me, thou still-returning Agni, with life, with lustre, progeny, and treasure, . With profit, wisdom, riches, and abundance.
8 A hundred, Agni Angiras! be thy ways, a thousand thy re- turns, With increment of increase bring thou back tous what we have lost. Again bring hitherward our wealth.
9 Return again with nourishment ; Agni, again with food and life. Again preserve us from distress,
10 Agni, return with store of wealth, Swell with thino over- flowing stream that fecdeth all on every side,
11 I brougtit thee: thou hast entered in. Stand stedfast and immovable. * Let all the people long for thee. Let not ‘thy kingship fall , away.
12 Varuna, from the upmost bond release us, let down the lowest and remove the midmost. So in thy holy iaw may we made sinless belong to Aditi, O thou Aditya.
13 High bath the Mighty risen before the Mornings, and come to-us with light from out the darkness. Fair-sbapen Agni with white-shining* splendour CS filled at birth all human habitations.
14 The Hamsa homed in light, the Vast in mid-air, the Priest beside the altar, Guest within the house, Divélter in noblest place, mid men, in truth, in sky, born of flood, kine, truth, mountain, he is holy Law. ‘The Great.
15 Knowing all holy ordinances, Agni, be seated in the lap of this thy mother. "Do not with heat or glowing flame consume her : shine thou witbin her with refulgent lustre.
16 Within this Fire-pan with thy light, O Agni, in thy proper seat, Glowing with warmth, be gracious thou, OJatavedas, unto her.
17 Being propitious unto me, O Agni, sit propitiously. Having made all the regions blest, in thie own dwelling seat thyself.
18 First Agni sprang to life from out of heaven, the second time from us came Jatavedas, Thirdly. the Manly-souled was in the waters. The pious lauds and kindles him Eternal.
19 Agni, we know thy three powers in three stations, we know thy forms.in many a place divided. We know what. name supreme thou hast in secret: we know the source from which thou hast proceeded.
20 The Manly-souled lit theo in sea and waters, Man’s Viewer lit thee in the breast of heavon. There as thou stoodest iv the third high region ‘the Bulls inéreased thee in the waters’ bosom. Pd He holds Agui up to the south-east with the text taken from R. V. ar ite lowers him with the text (repeated from X. 24) taken from R. V. 1V, 40. 5, and a-sacrificial formula of one word. The Great: brikat ; Trath, understood that is, Agni, As he pronounces this formula he lays Agni on e seat. X. of the Rigveda, ascribed to the Rishi Vatsaprt son of Bhalanda. out of Heaven: or, from Dyaus or Heaven his father, in the ape of is Sun. From us: produced by men in the shape of sacri nd domeatic fire. In the waters: of the firmament, in the shape of Tightaing, the third form of Agni,‘ Manly-souled: or, Frioud of men.
20 Manly-souled : or, Friend of men; Varuna, according to Sdyaza, and Prajapati, according to Mabldharn, Prof. Ludwig thinks that Dyaus (cp, ‘verse 8) may be meant, and Prof. Grassmann that Indra, the kindler of thé lightning, is intended, ' he Bulls; or, the Mighty Ones ; the Maruts,
21 Agoi roared out, etc. (verse 6 repeated).
22 The spring of glories and support of riches, rouser of thonghts and guardian of the Soma, Good Son of Strength, a King amid the waters, in forefront of the Dawns he shines enkindled,
23 Germ of the world, ensign of all creation, he sprang to life and filled the earth and heaven. Even the firm rock be cleft when passing over, when the Five Tribes brought sacrifice to Agni.
24 So among mortals was immortal Agni etablished ox cleans- ing, wise, and eager envoy. He waves the red smoke that he lifta above him, striving to reach the heaven with radiant lustre,
25 Far hath he shone, etc. (verse 1 repeated).
26 Whoso this day, 0 God whose flames are lovely, makes thee acake, O Agni, mixed with butter, Lead thou and further him to higher fortune, to bliss be- stowed by Gods, O thou Most Youthful. .
27 Endow him, Agni, with a share of glory, at every eong of praise sung forth enrich him. . . Dear let him be to Sarya, dear to Agni, pretmiuent with son and children’s children,
28 While, Agni, day by day men pay thee worship they win thomeelves ali treasures worth the wishing. Allied with thee, eager and craving riches, they have dis- closed the stable filled with cattle,
29 Agni, man’s gracious Friend, the Soma’s keeper, Vaigvavara, hath been lauded by the Rishis. We will invoke benignant Karth and Heaven: ye Deitios, give us wealth with hero children.
30 Pay service unto Agni with your fuel, rouse your Guest with oil: In bien present your offerings. Some extraordinary forest conflagration may, perhaps, be referred to, The Fice Tribes: literally, the five men ; according to Styana, men in general, and according to Mabtdhara, the inetitutor of tbe saeritice aud the four chief priests, But some special and remarkable oconsion seeins to be referred to, auch as the assoctated sacrifice offered by represeutatives of the Five Confe. derate Aryan races or tribes. See The Hymns of the Rigveda, Index. the celestial Soma, the nectar or ambrosia of the Gods. See A. Hillebrandt, Vedische Mythologie, I. 330—336. i ‘The Sacrificer stations a car northward of Ukhyn Agni, turned towards the east, and lays a kindling-etick on the fire, reciting tho text.
31 May all the Gods, O Agui, bear thee upward with their ear- nest thoughts : Not to be looked on, rich in light, be thou propitious unto us.
32 Agni, go forth resplendent, thon with thina auspicions flames of Shining ‘with mighty beams of light harm not my people with thy form.
33 Agni roared out, ete. (verse 31 repeated.) -
34 Far famed is this the Bharata’s own Agni: he skmeth like the Sun with lofty splendour. He who hath vanquished Piru in the battle, the heavenly Guest hath shone for us benignly,
35 Receive these ashes, ye celestial Waters, and lay them ins fair place full of fragrance. © To him bow down the uobly-wedded Matrons! Bear this on waters as her son & mother.
36 Agni, thy home is in the | floods ; mto the plants thou forc- est way, And as their child art born anew.
37 Thou art the offspring uf the plants, thou art the offspring of the trees. The offapriog thou of.all that is, thou, Agni, art the Waters’ Child.
38 With ashes having reached the womb, the waters, Agni! and the earth, United with the mothers, thou blazing hast seated thee again.
39 Seated again upon thy seat, the waters, Agni! and the earth, Ia her, thou, most auspicious One, liest as in a mother’s lap.
47 This is that Agni where the longing Indra took the pressed Soma deep within his body. Winner of spoils in thousands ‘like a courser, with prayer art thou exalted, Jatavedas.
48 The splendour which is thine in heaven, O Agni, in earth, O Holy One, in plants, in waters, Wherewith thou hast o’erspread mid-air’s broad region, that light is brilliant, billowy, man-eurveying.
49 O Agni, to the flood of heaven thou mountest, thou callest, hither Gods, the thonght-inspirers. The waters, those beyoud the light of Sfrya, and those that are beneath it here, approach thee.
50 May the Purishya Agnis in accord with those that spring from floods, May they, benevolent, accept the sacrifice, full, wholesome draughts.
51 As holy food, Agni, to thine invoker give wealth in cattle, lasting, rich in marvels. To us be born a son and spreading offspring. Agni, be this thy gracious will to us-ward,
52 This is thine ordered place of birth whence, sprung to life, thou shonest forth. Knowing this, Agni, mount on high and cause oyr riches to increase.
53 Ranker art thou: Angiras-like sit steady with that Deity. Ranker-round art thou: Angiras-like sit steady with that Deity.
47 Sitting on the south of the circle and looking northward the Adhvaryu Jaye down four bricks in the middle of the circle, the first with the text from R. V, TIL 22. 1.
48 He lays the second brick with the text from R. V. ITT. 22. 2.
49 He lays the third brick with the text from R. V. III. 22. 3.
50 He lays the fourth with the text from R. V. III. 22. 4. Sere according to Y Mabtahare, friendly to, cattle; ‘Fires that dwell in mixt’: Hywns of the R. V. Born from foods ; the meaning of prdvanebhih is un- certain.
51 He sits on the north side facing the sonth, and lays down the south- ward one of the two hinder bricks with the text from R. V. IIT. 92. 5.
52 He lays down the northern one with the text, repeated from III. 14, taken from R. V. IIL. 29. 10.
53 Sitting on the south side, facing the north, he lays the northern one of the two front bricks, reciting the text. Angiras-| like: a8 thou wast wont to do with the ancient Fire-priest Angiras, Ranker-round: he lays down the second southward brick. That Deity: according to Mabtdhara, that famous deity Vayu.
54 Fill up the room, supply the'void, then settle steady in thy place. Indg-Agni and Bribaspati have set thee down in this abode.
55 The dappled kine who stream with milk prepare his draught of Soma juice— Clans in the birthplace of the Gods, in the three luminous realms of beaven.-
56 All sacred songs have magnified Indra expansive as the sea, ‘The best of warriors borne-on cars, the Lord, the very Lord of Strength,
57 Combine ye two and harmonize together, dear to each other, brilliant, friendly-minded, Abiding in one place for food and vigour.
58 Together have I brought your minds, your ordinances, and your thoughts, Be thou our Sovran Lord, Agni Purishya; give food and vigour to the Sacrificer. .
59 Thou art Purishya Agni, thou art wealthy, thou art prosper- ous. Having made all the regions blest, here seat thee in thine own abode, :
60 Be yo one-minded unto us, both of one thought, free from leceit. Harm uot the éaorifice, harm not the Patrou of the sacrifice. Be gracious unto us to-day, ye knowers of all thiugs that be.
61 Even as a mother bears hor son, Earth, Ukha bath bosne within her womb Purishya Agni. Maker of all, accordant with the All-Gods and Scasons, may Prajapati release her.
62 Seek him who pours not, offers not oblation ; follow the going of the thief aud robber. "This is thy way ; leave us and seek some other.. To thee,
63 To thee, sharp-pointed Nirriti, fall tomage! Loose and detach this iron bond that binds him. ~ Unanimons with Yama and with Yamf to the sublimest vault of heaven uplift hina.
64 Thou, Awful One, thon in whose mouth 1 offer for the un- loosing of these binding fetters, na Whom people huil as Earth witt their glad voloes, as Nirritt in every place I know thee.
65 The binding noose which Nityiti the Goddess: hath fastened on thy neck that none may loose it, T loose for thee aa from the midst of Ayus. Sped forward now, eat thou the food we offer. To Fortune, her who hath done this, be homage.
66 Establisher, the gatherer of treasures, he looks with might on every form and figure. Like Savitar the God whose laws are constant, like Indra he hath stood where meet the pathways.
67 Wise, through desire of bliss with Gods, the skiliul bind the trices fast, and lay the yokes on either side,
68 Lay on the yokes and fasten well the traces: formed is the * farrow, sow the seed within it. . Through song may we find hearing fraught with plenty : near to the ripened grain approach the sickle.
69 Happily. let the sharos turn up:the plosghlaud, happily go the ploughers with the oxen ! q Suna aud Sira, pleased: with. our oblation, cause ye our plants to bear abundant fruitage.
70 Approved by Visvedevas' and by Maruts, talmed be the furrow with sweet-flavoured fatness. Succulent, teeming with thy milky treagure, turn hitlerward to us with milk, O Furrow.
71 The'keen-shdred plongh that bringeth bliss, good for the Soma-drinker’s need, Shear out for me a cow, a sheep, s rapid drawer of’ the car, a blooming woman, plump and strong ! ,
72 Milk out their wish, O Wishing-Cow, to Mitra and to Varuna, ‘fo Indra, ta the Agvins, to Pishan, to people aud to pints. the limit of this darkness: we bave won the light.
74 The year together with the darksome fortnights; Dawn with the ruddy-coloured cows about hor; the Asvins- with their wonderful achiovements ; the Sun tozether with his dappled Coareer ; Vuigvauara with Idd und with. batter. Svaha!
75 Herbs that sprang up in time of old, three ages earlier than the Gods, — ‘ 7 Of these, whose hue is’ brown, will I'declare the hundred powers and seven. o
88 Help every one the otlfer, lend assistance each of you to each, Alll of you be asoordant, give furtherance to this spooch of mine. £9 Let fruitful Planta, and fruitless, those that blossom, and the blossomless, Urged cavard by Bribaspati, release us from our pain and grief Varuns ; Free me from Yama’s fetter, from sin and offence against the Gods.
91 What time, descending from the sky, the Plants flew earth- ward, thus they spake’: No evil shall befall the man whom while he liveth wo pervade.
92 Of all the many Plants whose King is Soma, Plants of hun- dred forme, ‘Thou art the | Plant moat excellent, prompt to the wish, swoet to the heart.
98 O all yo various Herbs whose King is Soma, that o’erspread the earth, ‘Urged onward by ‘Bribaspati, combine your virtue in this
94 ite a that hear this speech, and those that have departed far away," Come all assembled ‘and confer your healing power upon this Herb.
95 Untermed be ‘he who digs you up, unharmed the man for whom I And let no malady attack biped or quadruped of ours.
96 With Soma as their Sovran Lord the Plauta hold colloquy and say O King, we save from death the man whose cure.a Brahman undertakes.
97 Most excellent of all art thou, 0 Plant : thy vassals are the trees. Let him be subject to our power, the man who secks to injure us.
98 Beaete of catarrh art thou, of tumours and of hemorr- hoids Thou banishest Pakaru and Consumption in a hundred forma,
99 Thee did Gandharvas dig from earth, thee Indra and Brihaspati. ‘King Soma, knowing thee, O Plant, from his Consumption was made free.
100 Conquer mine enemies, the men who challenge me de thor subdue, Conquer thou all unhappiness : victorious art, thou, © Plant.
101 Long-lived be he who digs thee, Plant, aud he for whom [ feaserdind I long-lived, ywasd So mayst thou also, m long-lived, rise w with’s hundred shoots. evn e P
102 Most excellent of all art thou, O Plant; thy vassale-ate the trees. Let him be subject to out power, tho man who seeks to injure us, 7
103 May he not harm me who is earth’s begetter, ner he whose laws are faithful, sky’s pervader ; Nor be who first begot the lucid waters. To Ka the God let us present oblation.
104 reore tiyeelt hitherward, O: Earth, to us with sacrifice and Thy covering skin’ Agni, urged forth, hath mounted.
105 All, Agni, that in thee is bright, pure, cleansed, and meet. for sactifice, That do we bring unto the Gods.
106 I from this place have fed on strength and vigour, the womb of holy Law, stream of the mighty. In cows let it possess me and in bodies, I quit decline and lack of food, and sicknoss, :
107 Agni, life-power and fame are thine : thy fires blaze mightily, thou rich in wealth of Beams ! Sage, passing bright, thou givest to the worshipper, with strength, the food that merits laud,
108 With brilliant, purifying sheen, with ‘perfect sheen thou liftest up thysolf in light. Thou, visiting both’ thy Mothérs, aidest thom as Son: thou joinest close the earth and heaven.
109 O J&tavedas, Son of Strength, rejoice thyself, gracious, in our fair hymus and songs. In thee are treasured various forms of strengthening food, born nobly and of wondrous help.
110 Agni, epread forth, as Ruler, over living things: give wealth - __ to us, Immortal God. Thou shinest out from beauty fair to look upon: thou leadest us to conquering power. 11] To him, the wise, who orders sacrifice, who hath great riches under his control, Thou givest blest award of good, and plenteous food, givest him wealth that conquers all.
112 The men have set before them for their welfare Agni, strong, visible to all, the Holy. Thee, Godlike Oue, with ears to hear, most famous, men’s generations magnify with praise-sougs.
113 Soma, wax great. From every side may vigorous powers ‘unite in thee. Be in the gathering-place of strength.
114 In thee be juicy nutriments united, and power and mighty foe-subduing vigour. Waxing to immortality, O Soma, win highest glory for thyself {2 heaven.
115 Wax, O most gladdening Some, great through all thy filaments, and be A friend of most illustrious fame to prosper us.
116 May Vatsa draw thy mind away, even from thy ‘loftiest dwelling-place, Agni, with song that yearns for thee.
117 Agni, best Angiras, to thee all people who have pleasant bomes Apart have turned to gain their wish.
