Our sacrifice, God Savitar! speed onward: speed to his share the sacrifice’s patron. May the Celestial Gaudharva, cleanser of zhought and will, make clean our thoughts and wishes. The Lord of Speech sweeten the words w: utter!
So may he stimulate our prayers.
3 Savitar, God, send far away all troubles ind calamities, And send us only what is good.
4 Wecall on him distributer of wondrous bunty and of wealth, On Savitar who looks on men.
5 For Brahman ( Priesthood) he bindsa Brahman to the stake ; for Kshatra ( Royalty ) aRaj-nya; for the Maruts @ Vaisya ; for Penance a Sidra ; for Darkness a robber ; for Hell a homicide or a man who hai lost his consecrated fire; for Misfortune a eunuch; for Venality an Ayogd ; for Kama a harlot ; for Excessive Noise a Magadha ; ‘Books XXX, and XXXI. treat of the Purushanedha or Human Sacrifice, an old-established custom among almost all natins of antiquity. The cere- mony was to be performed by » Brahman or a ajanya, and was expected to obtain for the Sacrificer universal preéminenee and every blessing which the Horse-sacrifice might have failed to secure, The ritual resembles in many respects that of the Agvamedha; man, tie noblest victim, being ac- tually or symbolicaily sacrificed instead of the Horse, and men and women of various tribes, figures, complexions, characters, and professions being at- tached to the sacrificial stakes in place of th» tame and wild animals enu- merated in Book XXIV. These nominal victims were afterwards released uninjured, and, so far asthe text of the Whice Yajurveda goes, the whole ceremony was Inerely emblematical, » type of the allegorical self-immola- tion of Purusha, Embodied Spirit or the Cosmic Man. See Colebrooke, Miscellaneous Essays, II.; Weber, IndischeStreifen, I. 54 seq. ; Wilson, Selected Works, II. 247 seq ; Muir, Origiral Sanskrit Texts, IV. 289, note ; Oldenberg, Religion des Veda, p. 865; Romesh Chunder Dutt, Civilization in Ancient India, I. 274, 275 (first edition); Max Miller, Ancient Sanskrit Literature, 419 seq. ; Vedic India (Story cf the Nations Series), pp. 406— 413; A, Hillebrandt, Ritual-Litteratur, p. 153. perhaps ‘a gambler,’ or ‘an uuchaste woman,’ as Prof. Weber translates in Indische Streifen, I. 76, where, and in the following pages, Prof. W. has given a version, with explanatory notes, of the whole list of victims and objects to which they are dedicated Mdgadha: the word meaning original- ly ‘belonging to the Magadba country (Scuth Babar)’ meane a professional bard, minstrel, or panegyrist, the sun of a Vaisya and a Kehatriy4.
6 For Dances stable-master; for Song a publio dancer ; for Duty one who attends court ; for Pastime a timid man; for Sport achatterer; for Laughter an artist ; for Pleasure a woman-lver; for Desire a damsel’s son; for Dexterity a-car-builde; for Firmness » carpenter ;
7 For Trouble 5 potter's son; for Device an srtificer ; for Beauty a jevelier; for Welfare a sower ; for the Arrow- deity a make of shafts; for Injury a bowyer; for Action a bowstring-naker ; for Fate a rope-maker; for Death a hunter ; for ‘he Finisher a dog-leader ; .
8 For Rivers a fimerman; for Rikshikas a Nish&de’s son ; for the Man-tige: a madman; for the Gandharvas and Ap- sarases a Vritya; for Motives one demented ; for Serpents and Genii anuntrustworthy man; for Dice a gambler; for Excitementa non-gambler ; for Pisichas a woman who splits cane ; fo Yatudhanas a woman who works in thorns;
9 For Rendezvous a lover; for Homestead a paramour; for Trouble an unnarried elder brother ; for Nirriti a younger brother who ha; married before his elder; for Misfortune the busband of a younger sister whose elder sister has not been marriel ; for Representation a woman who em- broiders ; for Agreement a woman who deals in love charms ; for Gartulity a by-sitter; for Colour an obstinate man; for Strength a yielding man ;
10 For Interruptions ahunch-back ; for Delight a dwarf; for Doors a blear-eyed man ; for Sleep a blind man; for Un- righteousness a desf man; for Purifying Medium a physi- cian ; for Insight ar astrologer; for Craving for Knowledge an inquisitive man; for Desire of extra Knowledge an extra-inquisitive man; for Moral Law a question-solver;
11 For Eye-diseases an clephant-keeper; for Speed a horee- keeper; for Nourishment a cowherd; for Manliness « shepherd ; for Keenness a goatherd ; for Refreshment ploughman ; for Sweet Beverage a preparer of Sura; for Weal a house-guard ; for Well-being a possessor of wealth; for Supervision a doorkeeper’s attendant ; nexion with lions, tigers, hyenas, and wolves. Vrdtya: the chief of band of nomad Nonconformists of Aryan extraction, but absolutely independent and not following the Aryan or Brihmanist way of Bee A. V. XV. Pigdchas : a class of fierce and malignant imps or goblins, YdtudAdaas: fiendish sorcerers,
12 For Light a wood-bringer ; for Brightness a fire-kindler ; for the Sun’s Station a besprinkler; for Highest Heaven a high steward ; for the World of Gods a carver; for the World of Meu a distributer ; for All-Worlds a pourer-out: for Poverty, Affliction a stirrer-up of strife ; fur Sacrifice a washerwoman ; for Delight a female dyer ;
13 For Assault a thievish-hearted man ; for Homicide a slander- er; for Discrimination a dovr-keeper; for Inspection a door-keeper’s attendaut; fur Strength a servant; for Plenty a running footman ; for the Beloved a sweet speak- ev; for Safety the rider of a horse; fur the World of Svarga a dealer-out of portions ; for Highest Heaven a high steward ;
14 For Passion an iron-smelter ; for Anger a remover ; for Yok- ing a yoker ; for Pain wn assailant ; for Quiet au unyoker ; for Up-hill and Down-hill one who stands on three legs; for Form a conceited man ; for Virtue a femule vintment- maker; for Nirriti a female scabbard-oaker ; for Yama a barren woman ;
15 For Yama a mother of twins; for the Atharvans a woman who has miscarried ; for the First Year a gad-about ; for the Purivatsara one who has not borue a child; for the Idavatsara one who exceeds; fur the Idvatsara oue who transgresses ; for the Vatsara one who is worn out; for the Sumvatvara oue with grey hair; for the Ribhus a hide- dresser ; for the Sadhyas a currier ;
16 For Lakes a fisherman; for Standing Waters a fisher ; for Tank-waters a Nishida; for Reed-beds a fish-veuder ; for the Opposite Bank one who gropes for fish ; for This Bank a fish-catcher ; for Fords an Auda; for shallows a Maindla; for Sounds a Bhilla ; for Caverns a Kirdta ; for Moantain- heights a destructive savage ; for Mountains a wild man ;
17 For Abhorrence a Paulkasa; for Colour a goldsmith ; for Balance a merchant; for Repentance a sluggard ; for All Spirits a leper; for Prosperity a watchful man; for Failure a sleepy man ; for Mischief a chatterer; for Misfortune a shameless man ; for Undoing one who cuts up into small pieces ;
18 For the Dice-king a gambler ; for the die Krita one who con- templates his adversary’s ill luck ; for the Treta a ble- manager ; for the Dvapara a chief manager ; for nda one who will not leave the gambling-hall ; for Mrityu one who approaches cows; for Antaka a Cow-killer; for Hunger one who goes begging to a man who is cutting up a cow; for Misdeed a leader of the Charakas ; for Misery a robber ;
19 For Echo a reviler; for Noise a snarler; for End a very talkative man; for Endless a mute; for Sound a drum- mer ; for Might a Inte-player ; for Cry a flate-blower ; for Confused Tone a Conch-blower; for the Wood a wood- ranger; for Partly-wooded Land a forest fire guard ;
20 For Pastime a harlot ; for Laughter a jester ; for Lust a woman with spotty skin ; for Might these, the head-man of a village, an astrologer, and a watchman; a lute-player; a hand-clapper, a flutist, these for Dance; for Pleasure s musician ;
21 For Fire a fat man; for Earth a cripple; for Wind a Chan- dala ; for Mid-Air a pole-dancer; for Sky a bald-head; for the Sun a green-eyed man; for Stars a spotty man; for the Moon a leper; for Day » white yellow-eyed man; for Night a black man with yellow eyes.
