2 Varuna, Law’s maintainer, hath sat down, ete, a8 in X. 27.
Save me from death, Save me from lightuing.
3 Thee, by the radiant Savitar’s impulsion, with arms of Asvius, with the hands of Pashan, With leeeb-crafe of the Asving, { bespriukle for splendour, for the lustre of a Brahman ; With leech-craft of Sarasvati, besprinkle for manly vigour and for food to feed thee ; Bespriokle thee, by «pecial power of Indra, for strength of body and for fame and glory.
4 Thou art Ka. Noblest Ka art thou. Thee for the state and rank of Ka. Sumadgala! Susloka! Satyarajan !
5 My head be grace, my mouth be fame, my hair and beard be brilliant sheen ! ~ My breath be King and deathlessness, mine eye Sole Lord, mine ear the Prince !
6 My tongue be bliss, my voice be might, my mind be wrath, tay rage self-lord ! Joys be my fingers, and delight my members, conquering strevgth my friend !
7 Let my two-arms be Indr’s power, my bands be deed of manly might, my soul and breast be princely rule!
8 My ribs be royal goverument, my belly, shoulders, neck, “and hips, Thighs, elbows, knees, the people, yea, my members univer- sally !
9 My navel intellect, ete, ete. ... Duty am i in legs and feet, established 1 folk.
10 I take my stand on princely power and Kingship, on cows am I dependent, and on horses. On members I depend, and on the body, on vital breath dependent and on welfare, on heaven and earth and sacrifice dependent.
11 May Deities, eleven threes, the three and thirty bounteous Ones Whose House-Priest is Brihaspati, by impulse of bright Savitar, the Gods protect me with the Gods.
12 May the first Gods with the second, the second with the third, the third with Truth, Truth with Sacrifice, Sucri- fice with sacrificial texts, sacrificial texts with Simans, Saémans with praise-verses, praive-verses with fore and after-sentences, fore-sentences with inviting-texts, invit- ing-texts with Vashat-calls, Vashnt-calls with oblations, and oblations, fulfil my desires, Earth! All-hail !
13 Mv hair is effort aud attempt, my skin is reverence and approach, My flesh is inclination, wealth my bone, my marrow rever- _ ence,
14 Gods. Deities, whatever fault of ours have stirred the wrath of Gods, May Agni set me fre from that iniquity and all distress,
15 If in the day-time or at night we have committed acts of sin, May Vayu set me free from that iniquity and all distress.
16 If when awake or in our sleep we have committed acts of sin, May Sirya set me free from that iniquity aud all distress.
17 Kuch fault in village or in wild, company or corporeal sense, Each sinful act that we have done to Sidra or Arya, or to either’s disadvantage, e’en of that siu thou art the expi- ation.
18 Waters, Inviolable ones, etc. Said to be repeated from . 22. O ever-moving Cleansing Bath, eto. Repeated from III. 48,
19 Thy heart is in the flood, ete. Repeated from VIII. 25. To us let Waters, etc. Repeated from VI. 22.
20 As one unfastened froma stake, or cleansed by bathing after toil, As butter which the sieve hath purged, let water clean me from my sin.
21 Looking upon the loftier light above the darkness we have come To Sirya, God among the Gods, the light that ia most ex- cellent.
22 The waters 1 this day have sought, and to their essence have we come, Agni, come hither rich in milk, splendour and brilliancy bestow ou we, aud progeny and wealth.
23 A brand art thou: fain would we thrive. Fuel art thou and splendour: give me splendour. Earth comes ngain, the Dawa, the Sun. This Universe all comes again. May I possess Vaigvanara’s light, may I attain my vast desires, Earth | All-bail !
240 Agni, Master of the Vow, on thee I lay the kindling- stick. To ee fast-vow and faith I come, I, consecrated, kindle thee.
25 Fain would I know that holy world where Deities with ‘Agui dwell, Where priestly rauk and princely power together in accord- auce move.
26 Fain would I know that holy world where want and languor are unknown, Where in complete accordance move Indra and Vayu side by side,
27 Let thy shoot be united with his tendril, joint combine with joint. Tmperishuble sap for joy, thine odour be the Soma’s guard !
28 They pour it out, they sprinkle it, they scatter it, they make it pure. Tn the brown Surd’s ecstasy he saya What art thou} What art thou?
29 Indra, at morn accept our cake accompanied with grain and groats, with wheaten bread and hyums of praise.
30 To Indra sing the lofty hymn, Maruts! that slayeth Vyitra best, ‘Whereby the Holy Ones created for the God the radiant light that never dies.
31 Adhvaryu, on the straiuing-cloth pour thou the Soma press- ed with stones : Purify it for {ndra’s drink.
32 The Suvran Lord of living things, he upon whom the worlds depend, Mighty, the mighty’s King—by him I take thee, take thee ou myself, formulas. “Master of the Vow: sve I. 5. part thou hust in the mixture. His: the Soma’s part.
33 Taken upon a base art thou. Thee for the Asvins. This ia. thy home, etc.
34 Guard of my breath amd outward breath, the guardian of mine eye and ear, Alkbealer of my voice, thow art the mollifier of my mind.
35 Invited I feed upon thee invited, Whom Agviss, whom Sarasvati, whom Indra, Good Protec- tor, made.
36 Kindled in forefront of the Mornings, Indra with forward: light, long-active, waxing mighty, With three and thirty Gods, the Thander-wielder, smote Vritra dead and threw the portals open.
37 Son of Himself, the Praise of Meu, the Hero, measuring: out the sacrificial stations,. Rich in balls” fat, anointing: with sweet batter; wise; bright with guuds of gold, he:-sacrifiethh
38 Landed by Gods, Lord of Buy Steeds, the Helper; showing: his greatness, worshipped with’ oblations; Fort-render, Cowpen-cleaver, Thunder-wielder, may he ap- proach our sacrifice: rejoicing. 39: May Indra, Lord of Bays; sit by direction eastward on.earth accepting our oblution, And sacred grass, fair, far-spread, widely-stretching, anoint- ed’ by Aditvas and by Vasus. 4. To the strong Indra gothe sounding Portals; dames: with a goodly husband, swiftly moving !" Well-manned, divine, wide-be the Doors. thrown open, ex~ panding in their greatness for-the Hero !
41 Dawn and Night, lofty, sapful, richly-yielding, fair-showing, as they weave with varied colour The long-extenled thread im concert, worship the God of Gods, the lofty Hero Indra.
42 The two first pleasant-voieed celestial Hotars, arranging rites for man in sundry places, At head of sneritice stablishing Indra, increase the eastern light with sweet oblation.
43 Thriving by sacrifice may the three Bright Ones, taking de- light like wedded dames in Indra, Surasvati, Idi, Bodrati all-surpassiug, with milk preserve our sacred thread unbroken.
44 Muy ‘Tvashtar coming fro.n afar, the active, give, strength aud plenty to strony glorions Indra, And strong, prolific, worshipping, the Mighty at sacrifice’s. head give the Gods honour.
45 Let the divine Stake, like an Immolator, bind, as one ordered, to himself the victim, And, filling Indra’s belly with oblatious, season the sacrifice with sweets and butter.
46 Indra the Bull, swift.conquerer, wildly rushing bull-like te meet the Indu of the droppings— : Deligbting in a mind that scatters fatness, let the immortal Gods rejuice in Svaba.
47 May Indra come tous for our protection, here, lauded Hero, be our feast-companion. May he whose powers are many, waxen mighty, eherish, like Dyans, the sovran sway of princes.
48 From near or fur away may mighty Indya, giver of suecour, come for our protection, Lord of men, armed with thunder, with the Strongest, slaying his foes in conflict, in the battles.
57 When Soma flowed the Asvins Twain, the Leeches, brought sweet medicine, With Men’s Desire Sarasvati for Iudra, Soma, Nagnahu.
58 Worshipped, Surasvati bestowed on Indra, senses, mauly wer. The Asvins, through oblations paid, combined food, energy, and wealth.
59 The Agvins brought from Namuchi pressed Soma bright with foaming juice. ead with sacred grass brought that to Indra for his drink.
60 Sarasvatt and Indra with the Asvins Twain milked out desires From heaven and earth, the regions, the resounding and expansive doors.
61 Ye Agvins, Dawn and Night, by day and in the evening, fair of hue, Accordant, with Sarasvati, deck Indra with surpassing powers.
62 Guard us, O Asvins, through the day, guards us by night, Sarasvati. Celestial Hotars, Leeches! both guard Iudra when the juice is pressed.
63 The Asvins, and the Three, apart, Sarasvati, Idi, Bharat}, ‘As drink to gladden Iudra, poured strong Soma with the foaming juice.
64 The Agvins, our Sarasvati, and Tvashtar, when the juice was shed, Gave Indra balm, yea, mead as balm, glory and fame and many a shape. 65. Praising with foaming liquor at due times, Indra, Vanaspati, Sarasvatias cow gave forth sweet beverage with the Asvins Twain.
66 Asvins. to Indra ye with cows, with Masara and foaming drink Gave, with Sarasvati—All hail!—the pressed-out Soma juice and mead.
67 The Asvins and Sarasvati by wit from fiendish Namuchi Brought unto Indra sacred food, strength, brilliant treasure, ample wealth.
68 That Indra, strong through sacrifice by Asvins and Sarasvat’, Cleft Vala through to win him wealth, with Namuchi of Asura birth,
69 Supporting him in sacrifice with sacred food and mighty powers, Sarasvati, both Agvins and the cattle hymned that Indra’s praise.
70 Indra whom Bhaga, Savitar, and Varuna supplied with power, Lord of the sacrifice, may he, Good Guardian, love the wor- shipper.
71 Savitar, Varuna bestow gifts on the liberal offerer, Strength, power and treasure which the Good Protector took from Namuchi!
72 Varuna giving sway and power, Savitar grace with happiness, The Good Protector giving strength with fame, obtained the sacrifice.
73 With cows the Agvins, mighty power, with horses maniy vigour, strength, With sacred food Sarasvati, made Indra, Sacrificer, strong.
74 May those Nasatyas, fair of form, the Men who ride on paths of gold, Oblation rich Sarasvat{, thou, Indra! help us in our rites.
75 Those Leevhes righteous in their deeds, She, rich in milk, Sarasvati, That Vritra-slayer hundred-powered, invested Indra with his might.
76 Ye Agvins and Sarasvatt, joint drinkers of the Suré dranght, In Namuchi of Asura birth, give aid to Iudra in his deeds, 1T As parents aid a gon, ete., as in X. 34, when duly set apart, are offered np,— To Agni, Soma-sprinkled, drinker of sweet juice, Disposer, with thy heart bring forth a pleasant hymn,
79 Within thy mouth is poured the offering, Agni, as Soma in- to cup, oil into ladle. Vouchsafo us wealth, strength-winning, blest with heroes, wealth lofty, praised by men, and full of splendour.
80 The Agvins gave, with lustre, sight, Sarasvati manly strength with breath, Indra with voice and might gave Indra vigorous power.
81 With kine, Nasatyas! and with steeds, come, Asvins, Rud- ras! to the house, the sure protector of its men;
82 Such, wealthy Gods! as none afar or standing near to us may harm, yea, no malicious mortal foe. $3 Do ye, O longed-for Agving, lead us on to wealth of varied form, wealth that shall bring us room and rest.
84 Wealthy in spoil, enriched with hymns, may pure Sarasvatt desire with eager love our sacrifice.
85 She who awa‘ens sounds of joy, inspires our hymns, Saras- vati, she hath allowed our sacrifice,
88 Sarasvat', the mighty flood, she with hor light illuminates, she brightens every pious thought.
87 O Indra, marvellously bright, come, these libations long for thee, thus by fine fingers purified.
88 Urged by the holy singer, sped by song, come, Indra, to the prayers of the libation-pouring priest.
89 Approach, O Indra, hasting thee, Lord of Bay Horses, to the prayer: in our libations take delight.
