2 Lask this of thee with my prayer, étc., asin XVIII. 49.
3 Do thou who knowest Varuna, O Agni, put far away from
3 Do thou who knowest Varuna, O Agni, put far away from us the God’s displeastrre. Best Sacrificer, brightest One, refulgent, remove thou far from us all those who hate us,
4 Be thou the nearest unto us, O Agni, our closest Friend while now this Morn is breaking. Reconcile Varuna to us, be bounteous: show thy compas- sion and be swift to hear us.
5 We call to succonr us the mighty Mother of those whose sway is just, the Queen of Order, Strong-ruler, far-expanding, ne’er decaying, Aditi gracious guide and good protectress.
6 Sinless may we ascend, for weal, this vessel rowed with good oars, divine, that never leaketh, Earth our strong guard, incomparable Heaven. Aditi gra- cious guide and good protectress,
7 May I ascend the gocdly ship, free from defect, that leaketh not, Moved by a hundred oars, for weal.
8 O Mitra-Varuna, gracious Pair, with fatness dew our pas- turage, With mead the regions of the air.
9 Stretch forth your arms and let our lives be lengthened: with fatness dew the pastures of our cattle. Ye Youthful, make ne famed among the people: héar, Mitra-Varuna, these mine invocations.
10 Bless us the Coursers when we call, etc., as in IX. 16.
11 Decp-skilled in Law, eto., as in IX. 18.
12 Kindled is Agni with the brand, yea, kindled well, the excellent. The metre Gayatrl, the steer of eighteen months, give power and life!
13 Tantinapit whose acts are pure. our bodies’ guard Sarasvati, Usbniha metre and the steer of two years’ age give power - and life!
14 Agni with offerings, meet for praise, and Soma the immortal Anushtup metre and the steer of thirty months give power and life !
15 Agui with goodly grass spread out, deatbless with Pishan ‘at his side, Brihati metre and a steer of three years’ age give power and life |
16 The Deors divine, the mighty Regions, Brahma, God Bri- haspati, The metre Padkti, here a bull in his fourth year, give power and life !
17 The two youug Dawns of lovely form, the deathless Univer- sal Gods, The Trishtup metre, here, a bull ia his sixth year, give power and life !
18 The two celestial Hotars, both Physicians, Indra’s close- knit friends, The metre Jagati, an ox who draws the wain, give power and life !
19 The Three, Id4, Sarasvati, and Bharati, the Marut folk, Viraj the metre, here, a cow in milk, a bull, give power and life ! in honour of Intra. The steer : to be sacrificed. Give: to Indra, ever born anew. Here: in this and other verses msaning ‘to Indra,’
20 Te the wondrous, full of seed, Indragui furtherers of weal Dvipada metre, anda cow and vigorous bull give power and life !
21 Our slaughterer Vanaspati, Savitar who promoteth wealth, The metre Kakup, here, a cow who casts her calf, give power and life !
22 With Svaha mighty Varuna give healing power to Sacrifize ! The Atichhandas, Brihat, and a steer and bull give power aud life!
23 With the Spring Season may the Gods the Vasus praised with triple hymn And with Rathantara, give life to Indra, splendour, sacrifice.
24 With Summer may the Rudras, Gods, praised in the Paficha- daga hymn With Brihat, give to Indra strength; with fame, and sacri- fice and life,
25 May the Adityas with the Rains, lauded in Saptadasa bymn And with Vairdpa, with folk, strength, give Indra sacrifice and life.
26 With Autumn may the Ribhus, Gods, praised in the Eka- vimga hymn And with Virija, give with grace to Indra grace, life, sacrifice.
27 With Winter may the Maruts, Gods, praised in the laud of thrice nine parts, Tho Sakvaris, with strength give might to Indra, sacrifice aad life,
28 With Dew-time may the deathless Gods praised in the Thirty-three-part laud, The Revatis, with truth give sway to Indra, sacrifice and life.
29 Let the Hotar sacrifice with fuel to Agni in the place of libation, to the Agving, Indra, Sarasvati. A grey-colour- ed he-goat with wheat, jujue-fruit and sprouts of rice becomes a sweet salutary remedy, splendour, might, milk, Soma, Let them enjoy sweet butter with foaming liquor. Hotar, present offeriugs of butter.
39 Lat the Hotar, Taninapit, worship Sarasvati. A sheep, a ram, a salutary remedy on the honey-sweet path, bear- ing to the Agvins aud Indra heroic strength, with jujube- fruit, Indra-grains, sprouts of rice, becomes a salutary remedy, milk, Soma. Let them enjoy, etc., as in verse 29.
31 Let the Hotar worship Nardgimsa and the Lord Nagnahu. ‘A ram with Sura a salutary remedy, Surasvutt the Physi- cian, the golden car of the Asvins, the victim's omentum, with jujubefruit, Indra-grains, and rice-spronts, become a salutary remedy, the manly strength of Indra, milk, Soma, Let them, etc.
32 Let the Hotar, magnified wlth oblations, offering sacrifice, worship Sarasvati and Indra, increasing them with strength, with a bull and a cow. Strength and medicine to the Agvins and Indra are meath with jujube-fruit, Masara with parched grain, milk, Soma. Let them, etc.
33 Let the Hotar worship the wool-soft Altar-grass, the Physi- cians Nasatyas, the Physicians Agvins. A mare with a foal, a milch-cow is a physician. Sarasvatt the Physician yields medicine to Indra, milk, Soma, Let them enjoy, ete.
34 Let the Hotar worship the Doors. the Regions, the resound- ing, expansive Duors, the Regions, with the Asvins, Indra milks the two milky worlds. The Milch-cow Sarasvatt yields medicine for the Asving and Indra, pure light and strength. Milk, Soma. Let thei, ete.
35 Let the Hotar worship the two fair-formed Dawns. At night and by day the Asvins with Sarasvati compose im- petuous power, like healing balm, in Indra, like a falcon, Misara with light, thought, and grace. Milk, Soma, Let them enjoy, etc. : Agvins, and Indra. Watchfully by day and night Saras- vati as Physician, with balms, with lead, yields strength and power. Milk, Soma. Let them enjoy, eto.
37 Let the Hotar worship the three Goddesses, ‘I'he three active oves, With three sacrificial elements, lay balm and golden hue on Indra. The Asvins, Idi, Bharati—Saranvati with Speech yields might aud power to Indra, Mils, Soma, Let them enjoy, ete.
38 Let the Hotar worship Tvashfar full of good seed, the Bull active for men, Indra, the Asvins, Surasvatt the Physi cian. Vigour, speed, power, a fierce wolf as physician, fame with Surd is a medicine, Masara with grace. Milk, Soma. Let them enjoy, ete.
39 Let the Hotar worship Vanaspati the Immolater, the Lord of Hundred Powers, and awful Passion, the King, the ‘Tiger, and the Asvins, with reverence. Swrisvati the Physician yields wrath and power to Indra, Milk, Soma. Let them enjoy, ete.
40 Let the Hotar worship Agni. Of the drops of clarified butter, Svahé! Of the fat, omentum, etc, severally, Svaha! Svaha ! the goat for the Asvins, Svaha! the ram for Saras- vati. Svaha! the bull for Indra. To the Lion, to his might, power. Svab&! Agni the salutary remedy. Svib&! Soma, the power. Sviha! Indra the Good Deliverer. Savitar, Varuna Lord of Physicians. Svab&! Vavaspatt, beloved, food and medicine. Svihi! Gods who drink clarified butter. Agni aevepting the medicine. Milk, Soma. Let them enjoy, eto.
41 Let the Hotar worship the Asvins with the omentum of a he-goat. Let them enjoy the fat. Hotar, offer the sueri- ficial oblation. Let the Hotar worship Sarasvat! with the omentum of a ram. Let her enjoy the fat. Hotar offer the sacrificial oblation. Let the Hotar worship Indra with the omentum of a bull. Let him, etc.
42 Let the Hotar worship the Agvins, Sarasvati, Indra the Good Deliverer, ‘These your Somax, pressed, rejoicing with goats, rams, buils, giving pleasure with rice-shoote, young blades of corn, parched grain, joy-givers adorsed with Masaru, bright, milky, immortal, presented, drop- ping honey. these let the Asvins, Sarasvatt, Indra the Good Deliverer, Vritra-slayer, accept. Let them drink, rejoice iu, enjoy the Soma meath. Hotar, sacrifice.
43 Let the Hotar worship the Asvins. Let them eat of the he- goat, the sacrifice. Let them to-day eat the fat, taken from the middle, before those who hate ns, before huinan handling. Yea, let them eat amid the fodder of fields fresh with moixture, with their expanse of barley, limbs of those tasted by Agni, belonging to the Hundred Rudras, portions covered with fat, from the sides, from the thizhs, from the fore-feet from the chine. From every member of the divided victims these two make their repast. Thus let the Agvius accept. Hotar, offer the sacrificial oblation.
58 Let the God Agni Svishtakrit worship the Gods as is meet and right for each, the two Hotars, Indra, the Asvins, ‘Vak with speech, Sarasvati, Avni, Soma. Svishtakrit has been well worshipped, Indra Good Deliverer, Savitar, Varuna the Physician have been worshipped. The God Vanaspati, the Gods who drink clarified butter have been well worshipped, Agni by Agni. Let the Hotar Svishta- krit give the Hotar fame, great power, energy, honour, Ancestral libation.
59 Today this Sacrificer cooking viands, cooking sacrificial rice-cakes, binding a goat for the Asvins, a ram for Saras- vati, a bull for Indra, pressing Sur& and Soma juices for the Agvins, Sarasvat!, and Indra the Good Deliverer, has chosen Agni as Hotar. §0 To-day the divine Vanaspati has done good service to the : Aevins with a goat, to Snrasvati with @ ram, to Indra with a bull. They have exten these from the marrow onwards, they have accepted the cooked vinnds, they have waxed strong with the rice-cakes, ‘The Agnis, Sarasvati, and Indra have drank the Surd and Soma draughts,
