3 The Sixteenfold Stoma, strength and wealth. The Forty.
fourth Stoma, splendour and wealth. Apsas art thou, the complement of Agni. As such may all the Gods greet thes with praises. Enriched with songs of praise, Pyishthas, and butter, sit here and give us wealth with store of children,
4 Course metre. Space metre. Happy metre. Encompass ing metre. Covering metre. Mind metre. Expanse metre. River metre. Sea metre. Water metre. Kakup metre. Trikakap metre. Kavyametre. Ankupa metre. Aksharapankti metre, Padapaikti metre. Vishtérapaikt! metre. Kshurabhraja metre.
5 Covering metre. Clothing metre, Collecting metre, Part- ing metre. Brihat metre.’ Rathantara metre. Group metre. Vivadbra metre. Swallower metre. Bright metre. Samstup metre. Anushtup metre. Course metre. Space metre, Vigour metre. Vigour-giving metre. Emulating metre. Spacious metre, Inaccessible metre. Slow metre. Anhkitka metre. Ho begins the fifth layer with the bricks called Asapatnta, or Free from Enemies ; reciting two texts addressed to Agni as he sets one brick in front and ote bebind. § Ho laya a brick on the right, and addresses it with the formula, ‘Thou art’ being understood, Then one on the left with The Forty-fourfold ‘Stoma: etc, Then one in the middle with ‘Thoi art the complement, ete.’ repeated with ‘Agni’ instead of ‘Earth’ from XIV. 4. sete of ten, corresponding to the ten regions of the sky, ‘Thou art’ being understood before each formula. Course: in which all living creatures move, that is, this world, Space: the middle air or firmament. Happy: the sky. Hucompassing : the regions. Covering: food, Mind: Prajipati. Rakup: breath. Trikakup: upward breathing. Kdvya: the three Vedas. dikupa: water, Aktharapankti: the heavenly world. Padapaikti: this world, Vishtdrapankti: the region or regions, Keharabhrdja: .Bright Razor 3 the Sun.
5 Covering: fovd. Clothing: food. Collecting: night Parting: day. Brikat: yonder world, Rathantara: this world. Group: the wind. Viva- hea: (Yoke): the air, Swallower: food, Bright; fire, Samstup
6 With the ray for truth quicken thou truth, With advance by duty quicken duty. With following by heaven quicken heaven. With union by middle air quicken middle air. ‘With Pratidhi by Earth quicken Earth. With support by rain Agu rain, With blowing away by day quicken day. With following by night quicken night. With clarified butter by the Vasus quicken the Vasus, With perception by the Adityas quicken the Adityag.
7 With the thread by prosperity quicken. prosperity. With the creeper by revelation quicken revelation. With re- freshment by plants quicken plants, With the best by bodies quicken bodies. With the invigorating by religious study quicken religious study. With the victorious by brilliance quicken brilliance.
8 Thou art Pratipad, for Pratipad thee. Thou art Anupad, for Anupad thee. Thou art Sampad, for Sampad thee. Thou art brillignce, for brilliance thee.
9 Trivgit (triple) art thou, thee for Trivyit. Pravrit art, thou, thee for Prayrit. Vivyit art thou, thee for Vivyit. Savrit * art thou, thee for Savyit. Thou art attack, thee for attack. Thou art concurrence, thee for goncurrence. Thou art ascent, thee for ascent. Thou art upstriding, thee for upstriding, With Energy ps overdord quicken fond- essence. .
10 Thou art the Queen, the Eastern region. The bright Vasug are thine over-lords. Agui is thy warder-off of hostile weapons. May the Trivrit Stuma assist thee on earth. The Ajya Uktha 6x thee firmly against slipping. -The Rathantara Siman establish thee in the sky for secure station. May the first-born Rishis extend thes among’the ‘Anushtup: food. Course ..Bzpanse: eee verse 4. Vigour: food. Vigour giving: Agol. Emulating : yonder world. Spacious: this world. Cover: ‘the air. Inaccessible: the Sun. Slow: the Paakti. Aikdika: water. number, with a formuls addressed to each, The ray: the Sun, which as the giver of light is food, Advance: meaning food. By duty: scpording ta Mabtdhara, jn this and the following formylas of this verse the instrumental’ care is used for the dative ; for daty, etc, ae * food,’ aud he gives the same meaning to Pratipad, Anupad, etc, in the following verse. ploughing, seed, and rain, He gives similar explanations of the other un’ translatable words in the verse. 10, He lays down the Nakasudas or Sky-seated bricks, Iaid down in front. Ajya Ustha: a litany to Agni. Ri Disposer : ‘Bpeech, Over-lord: Mind, Gods by the measure and amplitude. of heaven. May this Disposer and the Over-Lord extend thee, May all, concordant, settle thes on the ridge of heaven iu the world of Svarga.
11 Thou art Far-ruling, the Southera region. The bright -'* - Rudras are thine over-lords. Indra is thy warder-off of arrows, May the Pafichadasa Stoma eupport thee on earth. The Ptatiga Uktha fix thee firmly agaiust slipping. The Brihat Siman establish thee in the sky, eto, (the rest as in 10),
12 Thowart Universal Ruler, the Western region. The Adityas are thine over-lords. Varuna is thy Warder-off of missiles. The Spptadaga Stoma support thee on earth. The Marut- vatiya Uktha fix thee firmly against slipping. The Vairapa Siman establish thee, etc. (as above ).
13 Thou art Iudependent Ruler, thé Northern region. (The rest is identical with 12, with the substitution of Maruts ...Soma....Vimga: Stoma ...Nishkevalya Uktha....Vairija Saman for the corresponding names ).
44 Thou art Lady-Paramount, the Lofty region. (The rest a3 above, Vigvedevas...Brihaspati ..Tripava and Trayastrimsa, Stomas,.,Vaisvadeva and Maruta Ukthas...Sakvara and Raivate Sdmans being substituted for the corresponding names,
23 Guide of the rite art thou and of the region to which with thine auspicious teams thou tendest. ‘Thy light-bestowing head to heaven thou liftest, making thy tongue oblation-bearer, Agni.
24 Agni is wakened by the people’s fuel to meet the Dawn who cometh like a milch-cow. Like young trees shooting up on high their branches his flames are rising to the vault of heaven.
25 To bim adorable, sage, strong aud mighty we bave sung forth our song of praise and homage, Gavishthira hath raised with prayer to Agni this laud far- reaching 88 the gold in heaven.
26 Here by ordainers was this God appointed first Invoker, best at worship, to be praised at rites ; Whom Apnavina and the Bhrigus caused to shine bright: coloured in the wood, spreading to every house.
27 The watchful Guardian of the people hath been bore, Agni the very strong, for fresh prosperity. With oil upon his face, with high heaven-touching flame, he: shineth splendidly, pure for the Bharatas,
28 Agoi, At es discovered thee what time thou layeat hid- dem, acibgteae from wood to wood. Thou by attrition art produced as conquering might, and. men, O Angiras, call thee the Son of Strength.
29 Offer to Agni, O my friends, your seemly food, your seemly: praise ; To him supremest o'er the folk, the Son of Strength, the Mighty Lord.
30 he mighty Agni, gatherest up all that is precious for thy riend. Bring us all treasure as thon art enkindled in libation’s place: 23. He laye down the three Trishtup bricks with formulas in thet metre. he fro formu (repeated from XIU 16) in taken from R. V. X, 8. 6,
24 Taken from R. V. V. 1.
25 Taken from RV V. 112 Gavishthira; the Seer of the original hymn. The gold: the Sun.
26 He lays down three Jagatt bricks with formulas in that metre, 48 syllables iu a stanta, ‘The first formula is taken from R, V. IV. 7.1. It has occurred also in IIT. 15.
31 0 Agni, loved of many, thou of fame most woadioué, is their homes Men call on thee whose hair is flame to be the bearer of their gifts. : .32 With this my reverent hymm I calf Agni for you, the of Strength, Dear, wisest envoy, served with noble sacrifice, immortal messenger of all.
33 Immortal messenger of all, immortal messenger of alt, His two red steeds, all-cherishing, he harneaseth: let him, well-worshipped, urge them fast.
34 Let him well-worshipped urge them fast, let him well-wor- shipped urge them fast. Then hath the sacrifive good prayer and happy end, and heavenly gift of wealth to men.
35 O Agni, thou who art the Lord of wealth in kine, the Son of Strength, Vouchsafe to us, O Jatavedas, high renown.
36 He, Agui, kindled, good and wise, must be exalted in our song: Shine, thou of many forms, shine radiantly on us,
37 O Agni, shining of thyself by night and when the morning breal . ks, Burn, thou whose teeth are sharp, against the Rakehasas.
38 May Agni, worshipped, bring us bliss, may the gift, Blesséd One! and sacrifice bring bliss, Yea, may our praises bring us bliss.
39 Yea, may our praises bring us bliss. Show forth the mind that brings success in war with fiends, wherewith thou conquerest in fights:
40 Wherewith thou conquerest in fights. Briug down the many aa hopes of our enemies, and let us vanquish with thine aid. 8+8+12+8 syllables, The first formula is taken from RB. V. VIL 16. 1. Brihatt and Satobrihatt, the second and third verses of this triplet are made up out of verse 2 with the aid of repetitions.
35 He lays down three Ushpih bricks with a triplet in that metre (8+8+12 syllables) from R. V. I. 79, 4—6.
88 He lays down the three Kakup bricks with a triplet in that metre Brlz+ 8) Mites iieken oe R. Lane 19, Mert and 3 to gether out of the rihat! verse e origi mu, with padas repeated as in 33 and $4. 7 VERSE 46.) WHITE YAJORVEDA. 187
41 I value Agai, that good Lord, the home to which the kine return 5 ‘Whom fleet-foot coursers seek as home, and strong enduring steeds as home. Bring food to those who sing thy praise.
42 ‘Tia Agni whom we laud a8 good, to whom the milch-kine come in herds, To whum the coursers swift of foot, to whom onr well-born princes come, Bring food to those who sing thy praise.
43 Thou, brilliant God, withiu thy mouth warmest both ladles of the oil. So fill us also in our hymns abundantly, O Lord of Strength. Bring foud to those who sing thy praise.
44 Agni, with lauds this day may we bring thee that which thou lovest, Right judgment, like a horse, with our devotions.
45 For thou hast ever been the ear-driver, Agni, of noble Strength, lofty sacrifice, and rightful judgment.
46 Through these our praises come thou to meet us, bright as the’ sunlight, O Agni, well-disposed, with all thine aspects.
47 Agni I hold as Herald, the munificent, the gracious Son of Strength who knoweth all that live, as ‘holy singer know- ing all; Lord of fair rites, a God with form erected, turning to the Gods, He, when the flame hath eprung forth from the sacred oil, the offered fatness, longeth for it with his glow.
48 O Agni, be our nearest Friend, be thou a kind deliverer and a gracioas Friend. Come as good Agni, come as excellent and give us ponte most splendidly renowned. ~ To thee then, O most bright, O radiant God, we come with prayer for happiness for our friends.
49 With wHat devotion, winning light, the Rishis came, kind- ling Agni, to the holy session, Even with that in heaven I stablish Agni whom men call him whose sacred grass is scattered.
50 Gods, let us follow him with wives beside us, with sons, with. brothers, with our gold adornments, Grasping the sky up in the world of virtue, on the third height, the luminous realm of heaven.
51 This Agni mounted up to Speech’s Centre, Lord of the- Brave, observant, ever-active. Laid on the back of Earth, may he, resplendent, cast under foot those who would fight against us.
52 May this most manly Agni, strength-bestower, giver of thou- sands, shine with care that fuils not. Resplendent in the middle of the water, make thine approach to the celestial mansions,
53 Make him go forth from all sides: meet, approach ye. O Agui, make the paths for Godward travel. Making the Parents young with life’s renewal, the out-span_ thread in thee have they extended.
54 Wake up, O Agni, thou, and keep him watchful. Wish and. fruition, meet, and he, together, Tn this and in the loftier pabitation be seated, All Gods! and the Sacrifieer.
55 Convey our sacrifice to heaven that it may reach the Gods, with that Whereby thou, Agni, bearest wealth in thousands and all . precious things.
56 This is thine ordered place of birth whence sprung to life thou shonest forth. Knowing this, Agni, rise thou up and cause our riches to increase.
57 Tapa, Tapasya, pair of Dewy Seasons: thou art, eto. (as in XITJ. 25),
58 On oa sky’s back may Parameshthin lay thee, etc. (as in 44). Thy Lord is Sfirya, ete. (as in XIV. 14),
59 Repeated from XII. 54.
60 Repeated from XII. 55.
61 Repeated from XII. 56.
62 Like a horse neighing, eager for the pasture, when he hath stepped forth from the great enclosure : Then the wind following blows upon his splendour, and, straight, the path is black which thon hast travelled.
63 In Ayu’s seat I set thee, in the shadow of the protector in the heart of Ocean, Theo luminous, bright with eyes, thee who illumest the sky, the earth, and air’s broad realm between them. .
64 On the sky’s back may Parameshthin set thee, eto. (as in “XIV. 12, substituting sky for air and Sarya for Vayu).
