Aay1 is That ; the Sun is That ; Vayu and Chandramis are That. The Bright is That; Brahma is That, those Waters, that Prajapati.
ent One. No one hath comprehended him above, across, or in the midst.
3 There is no counterpart of him whose glory verily is great. In the beginning rose Hiranyagarbha, etc. Let not him harm me, etc. Than whom there is no other born, etc.
4 This very God pervadeth all the regions; yea, born afore- time, in the womb he dwelleth. He verily born and to be born hereafter meeteth his off spring, facing sll directions.
5 Before whom naught whatever sprang to being; who with his presence aids all living creatures, Prajapati, rejoicing in his offspring, he, Shodast, maintains the Three great Lustres.
6 By whom the heavens are strong and earth stands firmly, hy whom light’s realm and sky-vault are supported ; By whom the regions in mid-air were measured. What God shall we adore with our oblation
7 To whom, supported by his help, two armies embattled look while trem! ying i in their spirit, Where over them the risen Sun is shining. What God shall we adore with our oblation ? What time the mighty waters, etc. He in his might sur- veyed, etc.
8 The Sage beholdeth That mysterious Being wherein this All hath found one only dwelling. Therein unites the Whole, and thence it issues: far-spread it is the warp and woof in creatures,
9 Knowing Eternity, may the Gandharva declare that station, parted, kept in secret. Three ateps thereof in mystery are hidden: he who knows these shall be the father’s father.
10 He is our kin, our Father and Begetter: he knows all be- ings and all Ordinances, Tn whom the Gods obtaining life eternal have risen upward to the third high station,
11 Having encompassed round existing creatures, the worlds and all the Quarters and Mid-quarters, Having aproached the first-born Child of Order he with his Self into The Self hath entered. by his favour, Heaven and Barth look up. See M. Miller, Vedic iymne, Part I. pp. 2,9. What time, ete. : repeated from KXVIL. 25, He in his might: repeated from XXVIL 26. i : Brahma, the Absolute. Unites : is absorbed, at the periodical destruction of the universe at the ond of » Kalpa or day of neon of four hundred and thirty-two million years of mortals. i at the time of a new creation. here. according to Mahtdhara, Colebrooke, and Weber, the sage, the learn- ed theologian ; or, it may be, the Sun. Parted: in the absorption and the re creation of the universe. The A. V. reading is puramam, highest. Three steps: according to Mahtdbara, the three padni, steps, or conditions, are creation, contiunance, and disappearance, or the Absolute (Brahma), the Detniurgus or Creator, and the individual Self. Prof. Weber suggesta that the reference is to the Purusha Sakta, 8, 4, of Book XXXI, Futher's father: wiser than. and able to teach, his elders. is here identified with the Creator was originally immortal and the other Gods obtrined immortality through bimn, Third high, sation: highest heaven. The first line is taken from A. V. 1, 8. Cf R.V.X. 82. 3, of human life. Encompaxsed round: with the glance of his enlightened mind which shows the universe to be Brahms. Order : the eternal Law of the universe, whose first-born Child is apparently Prajapnti; or, according to Mabtdhara, Vak the Sacred Word connoting religivus ceremonies por- formed therewith. He: the performer of the Universal Secrifice.
12 Having gone swiftly round the earth and heaven, around the worlds, around the sky, the Quarters, Having spread out the lengthened thread of Order, he views, and he becomes and is That Being.
13 To the Assembly's woudrous Lord, to Indra’s lovely Friend who gives Wisdom. have I drawn near in prayer.
14 That wisdom which the Companies of Gods, and Fathers, recognize. Even with that intelligence, O Agni, make me wise to-day. All-hail !
15 Varuna grant me wisdom! grant it Agni and Prajapati! Wisdom may Indra, Vayu graut. May the Creator grant it me, All-hail!
