His be the fires, eternal, purifying, protectors of our homes, whose smoke is shining, White, waxing in their strength, for ever stirring, and seat- ed in the wood : like winds are Somas.
aloft to heaven Rise, lightly borne, the flames of fire.
3 Bring to us Mitra-Varuna, bring the Gods to the great. sacrifice ; Bring them, O Agni, to thine home.
4 Yoke, Agni, as a charioteer, thy steeds who best invoke the Gods : As ancient Hotar take thy seat. § To fair goals travel Two unlike in semblance: each in suc- cession nourishes an infant. One bears a Godlike Babe of golden colour : bright and fair- shining is be with the other.
6 Here by ordainers was this God appointed first Invoker, best at worship, to be praised at rites, Whom Apnavina and the Bbrigus caused to shine, bright- coloured iu the wood, spreading to every house.
7 Three times a hundred Gods, and thrice: a thousand, and three times ten, and nine have worshipped Agni, For him spread sacred grass, balmed him with butter, and stablished him as Priest and Sacrificer. ‘The formulas for the Universal Sacrifice are continued. is taken from R. V. X. 46, 7. Protectors: this is Mah{dhara’s explanation of aritrd, as though the word came from ari, an enemy, and trf, to protect from. The literal meaning is oare, rudders, or propellers. Like winds: aa winds fan flame, so Soma libatious increase the might of Agni. and Fire, or the Moon, by night.
7 R.V.III.9.9. In the Vaisvadeva Nivid or Formula of Invitation to the All-Gods, the number of the Gods is said to be 8 times 11, then $8, then 808, then 3003. By adding together 38 + 303 + $000 the number 3339 is ob- tained, Haug’s Aitareya Brihmavam, IL p, 212, note,
8 Him, messenger of earth and head of heaven, Agni Vaigva- nara, born in holy Order, The Sage, the King, the Guest of men, vessel fit for their mouths, the Gods have generated,
9 May Agui slay the foemen,—fuin for riches, through the love of song Kindled, bright, served with sacrifice.
10 With the All-Gods, with Indra and with Vayu drink the Soma mead, O Agni, after Mitre’s laws. 1L When splendour reached the Lord of men to speed him, down from the heaven was shed the brilliant moisture. Agui brongit forth to light and filled with spirit the youth- ful host benevolent and blameless.
12 Show thyself strong for mighty bliss, 0 Agni; most excel: lent be thine effnlgent splendours. : Make easy to maintain our household lordship and trample down the might of those who hate us.
13 We have elected thee as most delightful for thy beams’ glow : hear our great laud, O Agni. The best men praise thee as the peer of Indra in strength, mid Gods, like Vayu in thy bounty.
14 O Agni who art worshipped well, dear let our princes be to thee, Our wealthy patrons who are governiors of men, who part in gifts their stalls of kine.
15 Hear, Agni who hast ears to hear, with all thy train of escort Gods. Let Mitra, Aryaman, seeking betimes our rite, seat them upon the sacred grass,
16 The Freedom of all Gods who merit worship, freely received as Guest in all men’s houses, Agni who hath secured the Gods’ high favour, may he be gracious to us, Jatuvedas,
17 In great enkindled Agni’s keeping and, for bliss, free from all sin before Mitra and Varuna, May we share Savitar’s best animating help. We crave this gracious favour of the Gods to-day.
18 Like barren cows, moreover, swelled the waters: singers approched thy holy cult, O Indra. Come thou to us as to his team comes Viyu. Thou through our solemn hymns bestowest bounty.
19 Ye Cows, protect the fount. ‘I'he two mighty Oues bless the sacrifice, The handles twain are wrought of gold,
20 Now when the Sun hath risen to-day may sinless Mitra, Aryaman, Bhaga, and Savitar speed us forth, 7
21 Pour on the juice the ornament which reaches’ both the heaven and earth : derstood, . pendent. There fe a play on the words aditih aud atithih, guest, graha, or cup for Savitar, fe drawn. .
28 is taken from R. V. VIL 28 4. Barren oom: supposed to be fatter than, others. The waters: used for awelling the stalks of the Suna plant. in which libations of milk are hvated. According t» Mahtdhara, the Chdts ‘pila or pit (see VIL. 26 ; VILL. 28) is intended, which the cows are to aj proach. The too Mighty Ones: Heaven and Earth. Bless: conjecturally translated, the meaning of rapsudé being uncertain. ‘The two kinds of milk in the sacrifice are plentiful and fruit-giving’ :— Wilson, according to ‘Styaya, The handles: of the caldron ; but this too is doubtful. ; 20°R. V. VIL. 66. 4. Sinless: andgth : taken by Bayang as sandgasah: may Savitar, Mitra, Aryaman, Aud Buaga send us sinless forth, Soma. The Bull: the mighty Soma, TI take raed (as Prof. Ludwig has done) as an ivetrumental ewe. According to Mahtdhara the translation should be: The river nourishes the Bull . the Soma which grows near it. Thou: See: the beginnings of two Nivid formulas repeated, respective. | ly, from: VIL. 12 and 16. : Supply the liquid to the Ball. ‘Thou in the first old time. See, Vena,
22 As he was rising up they all revered him: self-luminous he travels, clothed in splendour. ‘That is the Bull’s, the Asura’s lofty nature: he, Omniform, hath reached the eternal waters.
23 I laud your Mighty One who joyeth in the juice, him who is good to all men, who pervadeth all ; Indra whose conquering strength is powerful in war, whosé fame and manly vigour Heaven and Earth revere.
24 Great is their fuel, strong their laud, wide is their sacrificial post Whose Friend is Indra, ever young.
25 Come, Indra, and delight thee with the juice at all the Soma feasts, Conqueror, mighty in thy strength,
26 Leading his band, Indra encompassed Vritra ; weak grew the wily leader of enchanters. He who burns fierce in forests slaughtered Vyamsa, and made the milch-kine of the nights apparent.
27 Whence comest thu alone, thou who art mighty, Iudra, Lord of the Brave? What is thy purpose? Thou greetest us, encountering us the Bright Ones. Lord uf Bay Steeds, say what thou hast against us, Indra, great in his power and might. Ne’er art thou fruit- leas. Never art thou neglectful. 2RV. IL . He: Indra asthe Sun. Kternal waters: amyitdni ; jaldni, waters, being understood ; ‘ the forces of eternity,’ according to woa Roth, Nature: or, title, such as Vritre-slayer, ote, 23: R. V. X. 50.1. consequently successful, are those whom Indra favours, ramavrinot ; a play upon the words, both from opi, to encompass ; ie drought demon being the encompasser or obstructer of the seasonal raing, He who burns fierce: perhaps the thunderbolt. Vyagsa: the name of coe of the demons of drought. See R. V. I. 101. 2; 108, 2. Miloh-bine of the nights: according to Sayan, the (stolen) cows (that had been h’dden) in; the night ; that is, he recovered the vanished rays of light. Mabidhars’s interpretation, ‘and made the lauda of devotees apparent,’ seems very far- fetch unattended by them as usual, in consequence of some ill-f bes arisen. See M. Miller. Vedic Hymns, Part I, (Sacred Books the Esst, XXXII PP- 179208), The verse ends with ‘against us.’ Then follow the boivnlags of tree Nivid formulas repeated respectively, trom VIL. 4, and 8,
28 Those men extolled that deed of thine, O Indra, those who would fain burst through the stall of cattle, Fain to milk her who bare but once, great, lofty, whose sons are many and her streams a thousand.
29 To thee the Mighty One I bring this mighty hymn, for thy desire hath been gratified by my laud. In Indra, yea, in him victorious through his might, the Gods have joyed at feast and when the Soma flowed.
30 May the Bright God drink glorious Soma-mingled mead, giving the sacrifice’s lord uninjured life ; He who, wind-urged, in person guards our offspring well, hath nourished them with food and shone o’er many a land.
31 His bright rays bear him up aloft, the God who knoweth all that lives, Sarya, that all may look on him.
32 Pure Varuna, with that same eye wherewith thou lookest upon one Actively stirring mid the folk—
33 Ye two divine Adhvaryns, come hither upon a sun-bright car : Bedew our sacrifice with mead. Thou in the first old time. See, Vena. The brilliant presence.
34 Loved of all men, may Savitar through praises offered as sacred food come to our synod, That ye too, through our hymns, ye ever youthful, may gladden at your visit all our people.
35 Whatever, Vyitra-slayer! thou Surya hast risen on to-day, That, Indra, all is in thy power.
36 Swift, visible to all art thou, O Sarya, maker of the light, Iluming all the radiant realm.
37 This is the Godhead, this the might of Sirya: he hath withdrawn what spread o’er work unfiuished. When he hath loosed his horses from their stution, straight over all Night spreadeth out her garment. and Mitra may behold His Bay Steeds well maintain their power eternal, at one time bright, and darksome at another.
39 Verily, Sarya, thou art grent ; truly, Aditya, thou art great, As thou art great indeed thy greatueys is: admired ; yea, verily thou, God, art great.
40 Yea, Sirya, thou art great in fame: thou, evermore, O God, art great. Thou by thy greatness art the Gods’ Home-Prieat, diviue, far-spread, unconquerable light.
41 Turning, as ’twere, to meet the Suu, enjoy from Indra all good things. When he who will be born is born with power we look to treasures as our heritage.
42 To-day, ye Gods, when Sirya hath ascended, deliver us from trouble and dishononr. This boon may Varuna and Mitra grant us, and Aditi and Sindhu, Earth and Heave
87 BV. 1115. 4. He hath withdrawn: ‘The cnltivator or artisan de sists from his labour, although unfinished, upon the setting of the Sun's when the sun ‘has withdrawn (iuto himself) the diffused (light which has been shed) upon the unfiuished task’:—Wilson. The stanza is difficult, and no thoroughly satisfactory explanation of it has yet Leeu offered. See Ludwig, Der Rigveda, IV. 131, 182, of the Night. Mitra; as God of the Day. explanation ie : The gathering (rays) proceeding to the sun distribute all: Jndra’s treasures (to living beings, as rain, corn, ete.) : may we too by our power leave those treasures as un iuberitance to him who has been or will be born '—See Prof. Cowell's note in Wileon’s Translation. Sindhu: ia the deity presiding over, or identified with, water, and it may mean the Sea, or the Indus, ?
43 Throughout the dusky firmament advancing, laying to rest the immortal and the mortal, Borne on his golden chariot he cometh, Savitar, God, beholding living creatures.
44 Soft to the tread the sacred grass is scattered: these go like Kings amid the band around them, At the folk’s early call on Night and Morning,—Vayu, and Pisban with his team to bless us.
45 Indra, Vayu, Brihaspati, Mitra, Agni, Pashan, Bhaga, Adityas, and the Marut host. ,
46 Be Varuna our chief defence, let Mitra guard us with all aids: Both make us rich exceedingly !
47 Regard us, Indra, Vishnu, here, ye Agvins, and the Marut host, us who are kith and kin to you. Thou in the first old time. See, Vena. O ye eleven Gods. Loved of all men, may Savitar. With the All-Gods. Ye Visvedevas who protect.
48 O Agni, Indra, Varuna, and Mitra, give, O ye Gods, and Marut host, and Vishnn. May both Nasatyas, Rudra, heavenly Matrons, Pishan, Sarasvati, Bhaga aceept us.
49 Indra, Agni, Mitra, Varuna, Aditi, the Waters, Mountains, Maruts, Sky, and Earth and Heaven, Vishnu I call, Pishan and Brahmanaspati,and Bhaga, Samsa, Savitar that they may help.
50 With us are raining Rudras, clouds accordant in call to battle at the death of Vritra, The strong, assigned to him who sings and praises. May Goda with Indra as their chief protect us. 44—54 celebrate the Vigvedevas or All-Gods, Verse 44 is taken from R. V. VIL 39, 2. mon children of Aditi the General Mother of all living beings. ‘The six un- connected Prattkas or Verse-beginnings are repeated from (1,°2) XXXUT. 21; (3) VIL. 19; (4) KXXILI. 84 ; (5) XXXIIL.10: (6) VIL. 38. Muhidhara, praiseworthy, qualifying Savitar,
60 R. V. VILE. 52,12, Raining: pouring down riches; bounteous. The strong: perhaps the thunderbolt, with which Indra aids the worshipper. 18 in my heart I may approach you. Protect us, Gods, let not the wolf destroy us. Save us, ye Holy, from the pit and falling.
52 This day come all the Marats, ets., as in XVHI. 31.
53 Listen, All-Gods, to this mine invocation, ye who iuhabit heaven and air’s mid-region. All ye, O Holy Ones, whose tongue is Agni, seated upon this sacred grass be joyful.
54 For thou at first producest for the holy Gods the noblest of all portions, immortality. Thereafter as a gift to men, O Savitar, thou openest existence, life succeeding life.
55 T with a lofty song call hither Vayu all-bounteous, filler of his car, most wenlthy. ‘Thou, Sage, with bright path, Lord of harnessed horses, im petuous, promptly honourest the prudent.
56 These, Indra-Vayu, have been shed, eto., as in VIL. 8.
57 Mitra of holy strength I call, aud fow-destroyiug Varuna, Who roake the oil-fed rite complete.
58 Nasatyas, Wonder-workers, yours are these libations with clipt grass, Come ye whose paths are bright with glow.
59 When Sarama had found the mountain's fissure, that vast and ancient place she plundered throughly. In the fluods’ van she led them forth, Tight footed: she who well kuew came first unto their lowing.
60 For nowhere did they find another envoy to lead the way than this Vaigvanara Agni, The Gods immortal strengthened the immortal Vaisvanara to win the land in battle.
61 The strong, dispellers of the foe, Indra and Agni, we invoke: May they be kind to one like me,
62 Sing forth to Indu, O ye men, to him as he is purified, Fain to pay worship to the Gods.
63 Driok Soma, Indra, banded with the Maruts who, Boon Lord! strengthened thee at Ahi’s slaughter, ’Gainst Sambara, Lord of Bays! in winning cattle, and now rejoice in thee, the holy singers.
64 Thou wast born mighty for victorious valuur, exulting, strongest, full of pride and courage. There, even there the Maruts strengthened Indra when his most rapid Mother stirred the Hero.
65 O thou who slewest Vritra, come, O Indra, hither to our side, Mighty One with thy mighty aids.
66 Thou in thy battles, Indra, art subduer of all hostile bands. Father art thou, all-conquering, cancelling the curse: vau- quish the men who fight with us.
67 Heaven and Earth cling close to thy victorious might As sire and mother to their child.
68 The sacrifice obtains the Gods’ acceptance, etc., a in VIIE. 4.
69 Protect our habitation, Savitar, this day with guardian aids around, propitious, ne'er beguiled. God of the golden tongue, keep us for newest bliss: let not the evil-wisher have us in his power.
70 For you have flowed, through noble miniatratiom, pressed by Adhvaryus, bright sweet-flavoured juices Drive on thy team and come thou hither Vayu : deink for thy rapture of the sap of Soma.
71 Ye Cows, protect, etc., as in verse 14,
72 Come ye foe-slayers to the place of meeting, to the birth- places of the two great Sages, With force of intellect unto the dwelling.
73 Ye two divine Adhvaryus, eto, asin verse 33, Thou in the time of old. See, Vena.
74 Transversely was the severing line extended: was it above, or was it, haply, under # There were begetters, there were mighty forces, free action here and energy up yonder.
75 He hath filled heaven and earth and the great realro of light, when at his birth the skilful held him in their hold. He like a steed is led forth to the sacrifice, Sage, graciously inclined, that he may win us wealth,
76 Call hither with the song and lauds the two best slayers of the foe, Delighting even in our hymn.
77 All Sons of Immortality shall listen to the songs we ‘sing; And be exceeding good to us.
78 Mine are devotions, hymns, sweet are libations. Strength stirs, and hurled forth is my rocky weapon, They call for me, for me their lauds are longing. To their libations these my Bay Steeds bear me. Gods who are addressed, ‘The stanza is difficult and obscure. urgi to make a division between the upper world and the lower, anil to bring duality out of unity. Begetters: the Fathers may be meant. Fret cotion : the happiness of the Fathers, ‘he verve is one of the obecurent of & very obscure hymn on Creation, kindle the fire. vdsata instead of dviedsatah which involves a harsh construction, deities invoked are Indra and Agni. pati, the itor of gods and men, MR VE. Indra addresses the Maruts in reply ‘to thelr quae tion in verse 27.
87 Yea, specially that mortal man hath toiled for service of the Gods, Who quickly hath brought near Mitra and Varuna to share his sacrificial gifts.
88 Approach ye, and be near to us. Drink, O ye Asvins, of the mead. Draw forth the milk, ye mighty, rich in genuine wealth! Injure us not, and come to us.
89 May Brahmanaspati draw nigh, may Sdnyita the Goddess come, And Gods bring to our rite which gives the fivefold gift the Hero, lover of mankind.
90 Within the Waters runs the Moon, he with the beauteous wings, in heaven. To yellow-hued abundant wealth, object of many a man’s desire, loud-neighing goes the tawny Steed.
91 Singing their praise with godlike hymn let us invoke each God for grace, Each God to bring you help, each God to strengthen you.
92 Agni Vaisvanara, set in heaven, with mighty splendour hath shone forth, Tnoreasing in his power on earth, benevolent, he quells the darkness with his light.
93 First, Indra-Agni! hath this Maid come footleas unto those with feet. Stretching her head and speaking loudly with her tongue, she bath gone downward thirty steps.
94 For of one spirit are the Gods with mortal man, co-sharers all of gracious gifts. May they increase our strength hereafter and to-day, provid- ing ease and ample room.
95 Indra who quells the curse blew curses far away, and then in splendour came to us. Indra, refulgeot with the Marut host! the Gods eagerly strove to win thy love.
96 To Indra, to your mighty Chief, Maruts, sing forth a mighty prayer. Let Satakratu, Vritra-slayer, kill the fiend with hundred- knotted thunderbolt.
97 Indra increased his manly strength at sacrifice, in the wild rapture of this juice ; And living men to-day, even as of old, sing forth their praises to hie majesty. May these. Good Lord of wealth. He with his might. Stand up erect.
94 RV, VEIL 97.14.
95 R. V. VIII. 78. 2
96 R. V. VIII. 78, 8, Satakratu: Lord of a Hundred Powers ; Indra. The flend : Vritra,
