2 That I to all the people may address this salutary speech,
To priest and nobieman, Sidra and Arya, to one of our own kin and to the stranger. Dear may I be to Gods and guerdon-giver. Fulfilled be this my hope: be that my portion !
3 Give us, Brihaspati, that wondrous treasure, that which ex- ceeds the merit of the foeman, Which shines among the folk etfectusl, splendid, that, Son of Law, which iy with might refulgent. Taken upon a base art thou. ‘Thee for Brihaspati. This is thy home. ‘Thee for Brihaspati,
4 Come hither, Indra, rich in kine! Drink Soma, Lord of Hundred Powers, Effused by braying pressing-stones. ‘Taken upon a base art thou. ‘Thee for Indra, rich in kine. This is thy home. ‘Thee for Indra, rich in kine.
5 O Indra, Vritra-slayer, come. Drink Soma, Lord of Hun- dred Powers, Expressed with stones whose wealth is kine. Taken upon a base art thou, ete., as in verse 4.
6 Vaigvanara the righteons One, the Lord of sacrifice and light, The heat that wasteth not, we seek. Taken upon a base art thou, ‘Thee for Vaigvanara. This is tby home: thee for Vaigvanara. Still in Vaigvanara’s grace may we continue: yea, he is King Supreme o’er all things living. Sprang hence to life upon this All he looketh. Vaigvanars bath rivalry with Sarya. Taken upon a base art thou, etc, as in verse 6.
8 Hitherward come Vaigvanara to succour us from far away, Agni through laud that brings him near! Taken upon a base, etc, as in verse 6. Agni is Pavamana, Suge, the 'Tribe-Priest of the Raoes Five: Yo bim of mighty wealth we pray. Tuken upon a base art thou. Thee for lustre. ‘This is thy home. ‘Thee for lustre.
10 May mighty Indra, thunder-armed, may Shodas! protect us well, and slay the wicked man who hateth Taken upon a base art thou. Thee for Mahendra, This is thy home. ‘Thee for Mahendra.
11 As cows low to their calves in stalls so with our songs we lorif; Ths nda, e’en your wondrous God who checks assault, who joys in the delicious juice.
12 Agni’s is the most fetching song. Shine mightily, thou rich in light ! Like the Chief Consort of a King, riches and strength proosed from thee. ~ ©
13 Come, here, O Agni, will I sing verily other songs to thee, And with these drops shalt thou grow strong.
14 The Seasons spread thy sacrifice! the Months protect thine offering ! May the Year guard our sacrifice for thee and keap our ebild- ren safe.
15 There where the mountains downward slope, there by the meeting of the streams The snge was manifest with song.
16 High is thy juice’s birth: though set in heaven, on earth it hath obtained : Strong sbeltering power and great renown.
17 Finder of room and freedom, flow for Indra, meet for worship, flow For Varuna and the Marut host.
18 Striving to win, with him we gain all wealth of the ungodly one, ‘Yea, all the glories of mankind,
19 May we be prosperous with brave sons, eattle, horses, each wish of ours, and varied blessings, With quadrupeds, and with the men about us. May the Gods guide our sacrifice in senson,
20 O Agni, bring thou hitherward the yearning Consorts of the Gods, Bring ‘I'vashtar to the Soma-draught.
21 O Neshtar girt by Dames, accept our sacrifice: with Ritu. drink, For thou art he who giveth wealth,
22 He with the Ritus fain would drink, Wealth-giver, from the Neshtur’s bowl. Begin, poy offerings: hasten ye.
28 Thine is this Soma: come thou near, approach it. Drink thou thereof, benevolent, and cease not. Sit on the sacred grass at this our worship, and take these drops into thy belly, Indra.
24 Come unto us, ye swift to listen! as at home, upon the sacred grass sit and enjoy yourselves. And, Trashtar, well content be joyful in the juice with Gods and Goddesses in gladsome company.
25 In sweetest and most gladdening stream flow pure, O Soma, on thy wav, Pressed out for Indra, for his drink.
