2 The red goat, the smoky-red, the jujube-red, these belong te
Soma, The brown, the ruddy-brewn, the parrot-brows, these are Varuna’s. One with white ear holes, one with partly white, one with wholly white, belong ¢o Savitar. ‘One with fore-feet white, partly white, wholly white, be- dongs to Brihaspati. She-goate.speckled, with small spots, with big spots, these beloug to Mitra-Varuna.
3 The bright-tailed, the wholly bright-tailed, the jewel-tailed, these belong to the Agvins. The white, the white-eyed, the reddish, these are for Rudra Lord of Beasts, Long- eared yoats are for Yuma; proud oues for Rudra ; cloud- coloured ones for Parjanys.
4 Gonts epeckled. transversely speckled, upward speckled are forthe Maruts. The reddish she-goat, the red-haired, the white, these belong to Surasvati. ‘The goat with diseased ears, the short-eared, the red-eared are Tvashtar’s. The black-necked, the white-flanked, one with bright-coloured thighs beleng to Indra and Agni. Those with black marks, small marks, large marks belong to Dawn, % Parti-cdlonred female victims belong to the All-Gods; red- coloured, eighteen mouths old to Vak; victims without distinguishing marks te Aditi; those of one same colour to Dhatar; weaned kids sacred to the Consortsf the Gods.
6 Black-necked victims for Agni; white browed for the Vasus; red fur Rudra; bright unes for the Adityas ; cloud-evlour- ed for Parjanya.
7 The tall goat, the sturdy, the dwarf, these are Indra-Vish- pu’s; the tall, the white fore-footed, the black-backed, Indra-Brihaspati's ; parrot-coloured the Vajins’; speckled Agui-Muruts’; dark-cdloured Pashan’s.
8 Variegated, Indra-Agni's ; two-coloured, Agni-Soma’a; dwarf oxen, Agni-Vishnu's; barreu cows, Mitra-Varuna’s ; partly variegated, Mitra’s. '
9 Black-necked ones, Agni’s; brown, Soma’s; white, Vayu’s; undistinguished, Aditi’s; self-coloured, Dhatar’s; weay- lings, the Gods’ Consorts’,
19 Black ones for Earth ; smoke-coloured for Firmament; tall coves for Sky; brindled ones for Lightning ; blotehed oues for Stars.
11 ‘Smoke-colowred omes be sacrifices to Spring; white to Summer; black to the Rains; red ones to Autumn; speckled to Winter ; reddish-yellow to the Dewy Seasou.
12 Calves eighteen months old to Gayatri; steers of two and a holf years to Trishtup; two year old steers to Jagat; three yeur olds to Anushtup ; four year olds to Dslinih.
13 Four year eld steers to Virdj; fall grown bulls to Brihatt; strong bulls to Kukup; draught oxen to Paikti; milch- cows to Atichhendas,
14 Black-necked victims sacred to Agni; brown to Soma; spott- ed to Savitar; weaned she-kids to Sarasvatt ; dark-colour- ed goats to Pishan; speckled victims to the Maruts; many-coloured to the All-Guds; burreu cows to Heaven and Earth.
15 Called contemporary, the dappled belong to Indra-Agui; black ones to Varuna; speckled to the Maruts ; horaless he-goats to Ka.
16 To Agui foremost in place he sacrifices firstling goxte; to the consuming Maruts thvse born of one mother ; to the Marute who perform domestic rites those born after a long time ; to the sportive Muruts those born together ; to the self-atrong Maruts those born in succession.
17 Called contemporaneous, the dappled belonging to Endra- Agui; those with projecting horns to Mahendra; the many-coloured to Vigvakarman.
18 Smoke-coloured, those of brownish hue, to be offered to the ‘Soma-possessing Fathers; the brown aud the smoky-look- ing to the Fathers who sit on sacred grass; the black and the brownish-looking to the Fathers who have been tasted by Agni; the black and the spotted belong to Tryambaka,
19 Called contemporaneous, the dappled belong to Suna and Stra ; white ones to Vayu; white ones to Sarya,
20 To Spring he offers Kapiijalas ; to Summer sparrows ; to the Rains partridges; to Autumn quails; to Wiuter Kakaras; to the Dewy Season Vikakaras.
21 To the Sea ke sacrifices porpoises ; to Parjanya frogs; to the Waters fishes; to Mitra Kulipayas; to Varuna cro- codiles, .
22 To Soma he sacrifices wild geese; to Vayu female cranes ; to Indra-Agni eurlews; to Mitra divers; to Varuna Chakravikna
23 To Agni he saerifices eocks; to Vanaspatis owls; to Agni- Soma blue jays; to the Agvins pexeogks ; to Mitra-Varuna pigeaus.
24 To Soma he sacrifices quails; to Tvashtar Kaulikas ; Mai- nas to the Gods’ Cousorts; Kulikas to the Gods’ Sisters ; P&arushnas to Agni Lord of the Homestead.
25 To Day he sacrifices doves ; to Night Sichapis ; to the Joints of Day and Night bats; to the Mouths gallinules ; to the Year great eagles.
26 To Ground he sacrifices rats; to Firmament field-rate; to Day voles; to the Quarters mungvoses; to the Iuter- mediate Spaces brownish ichneumous.
27 To the Vasuys he sacrifices black-bucks ; to the Rudras stags ; tothe Adityas Nyaaku deer ; to the All-Gods spotted deer; to the Sidhyas Kulinga autelopes, .
28 To {sana he sacrifices wild asses; to Mitra Gaurss; to Varuna, buffaloes; to Brihaspati Gayals; to Tvashtar camels.
29 Tu Prajipati he sacrifices men elephants ; to Vk white ants ; to Sight flies ; to Hearing black bees.
30 To Prajipati and to Vayua Gayal is to be offered ; to Varuna a wild ram; to Yamaa black ram; toa human king a monkey; to the Tiger a red doe; to the Bulla female Gayal, to the Kshipragyena a quail; to the Nilaigu 9 worm ; to the Sea a porpvise; to the Snowy Mountain an. elephant.
31 The Kinnara belongs to Prajépati; thé Ula, the Halikehna, the cat belong to Dhatar; the heron belongs to the Quar- ters ; the Dhuaksha to Agni; sparrow, sed snake, Saras,. these are Tvashtar’s; the curlew belongs to Wak.
32 To Soma an antelope is to be offered; wild goat, mungoose, Saki, these are Pashau’s ; the jackal is the Mayu’; the Gaura Indra’s; Pidva, antelope, cock, these are Anumati’s; the Chakravika is for Echo: 83. The: female: crane is Sarya’s; Sirga, Srijaya, Sayéndake, these are Mitra’s; to-Sarasvati belongs the human-voiced. Maina; to Ground the porcupine ; tiger; wolf, viper_be- long to Passion ; to Sarasvin the human-voiced. parrot.
