May my strength and my gain, and my inclination and my influence, and my thought and my mental power, and my praise and my fame, and my renown and my light, and my heaven prosper by sacrifice.
breathing and my vital spirit, and my thought and my reflection, and my voice and my mind, and my eye aud my ear, and my ability and my strength prosper by sacrifice,
3 May my energy and my force, and my self and my body, and my shelter and my shield, and my limbs and my bones, and my joints and my members, and my life and my old age prosper by sacrifice.
4 May my preéminence and my overlordship, and my wrath and my angry passion, and my violence and my impetu- osity, and my victorious power and my greatness, and my breadth and my width, and my height and my length, and my increase and my improvement prosper by sacrifice.
5 May my truth and my faith, aud my cattle and my wealth, and my goods and my pleasure, and my play and my enjoyment, and my children and my fature children, and my hymn and my pious act prosper by sacrifice.
6 May my religious rite and my immortality, and my freedom from consumption and my freedom from disease, and my life and my longevity, and my freedom from enemies and my freedom from danger, and my happiness and my lying down, aud my fair dawn and my fuir day prosper by sacrifice.
7 May my controller and my supporter, and my security and my firmness, and my goods aud my pleasure, and my knowledge and my understanding, and my begetting aud my propagation, and my plough and my harrow prosper by sacrifice. ‘This Book contains the formulas for the performance of the ceremony called Vasordhari, the Stream or Shower of Riches, a sort of Consecration Service for Agni as Kivg on the completion of the Fire-altar which is iden- tified with him. The Sacrificer offers an uninterrupted series of four hun dred aud one oblations of clarified butter poured from a large ladle of Udutmbara wood, while the Adhvaryu recites the formulas which are te ‘gain for the Sacrificer all the temporal and spiritual blessings therein ind cated.
8 May my welfare and my comfort, and what I hold dear and what I desire, and my love and my gratification, and my enjoyment and my substance, and my happiness and my felicity, and my higher bliss and my fame prosper by sacrifice.
9 May my vigour and my pleasantness, and my milk and my sap, and my butter and my honey, and my meal in com- pany and my drinking in company, and my ploughing and my husbandry, and my superiority aud my preémi- nence prosper by sacrifice.
10 May my wealth and my property, and my prosperity and my growth, and my pervading power and my lordship, and my abundance and my greater abundance, and my bad harvest and my unwasted crop, and my food and my satiety prosper by sacrifice.
11 May my gain and my future gain, and what I have and what I shall have, and my good road and my good path, and my suocess and my succeeding, and my achievement and my contrivance, and my thought and my good counsel prosper by eatrifice.
12 May my rice-plants and my barley, and my beans and my sesamum, and my kidney-beans and my vetches, and my millet and my Panicum Milliaceum, and my Panicum Frumentaceum and my wild rice, aud my wheat and my lentils prosper by sacrifice.
13 May my stone and my clay, and my hills and my mountains, and my pebbles and my trees, and my gold and my bronze, and my copper and my iron, and my lead and my tin prosper by sacrifice.
14 May my fire and wy water, and my creepers and my plants, ahd my plants with culture-ripened fruit and my plants with fruit ripened without culture, and my domestic animals and my wild auimals, and my substance and my future substance, aad my belongings and my power be produced by sacrifice.
15 May my treasure aud my dwelling, and my religious service and my ability to perform it, and my object and my- course, aud my way and my going prosper by sacrifice.
16 May my Agni and my Indra, and my Soma and my Indra, and my Savitar aud my Indra, aud my Sarasvati aud my Indra, and my Paishan and my Indra prosper by sacrifice.
17 May my Mitra and my Indra, and my Varuna and my Indra, and my Dbatar and my Indra, and my Marute and my Indra, and my All-Gods and my Indra prosper by sacrifice,
18 May my earth and my Indra, and my Air and my Indra, and my Sky and my Indra, and my Halfmonths and my Indra, and my Lunar Mansions and my Indra, and my Sky-regions and my Indra prosper by sacrifice.
19 May my Amgu and my Ragmi, and my Adhipati and my UpAmsu, aud my Antaryima and my Aindra-Vayaya, and my Maitra-Varuna, and my Asvina and my Pratiprasthina, and my Sukra and my Manthin proper by sacrifice,
20 May my Agrayana and my Vaiavadeva, and my Dhruva and my Vaigvauara,and my Aindragna and my Mabavaiavadeva, and my Marutvatiya aud my Nishkevalya, and my Sivitra and my Sérasvata, and my Patnivata aud my Hariyojana prosper by sagrifice.
21 May my ladles and my cups, and my VAyu vessels and my ‘Soma reservoirs, and my pressing-stones and my two press: boards, and my PGtabbrit and my Adhavaniya, aud my altar and altar-graas, and my Avabbritha and my cries of Good-speed prosper by sacrifice,
22 May my Agni and my Gharma, and my Arka and my Sirya, and my Prana and my Agvamedha, and my Prithivi and my Aditi, and my Diti and my Sky, and my fingers, powers, and sky-regions prosper by sacrifice, Gods, we have gone to light. We have become the children of Prajapati. We have become immortal.
30 In gain of wealth we celebrate, etc. = IX. 5.
31 This day come all the Maruts, all to aid us! Let all the fires be thoroughly enkindled. May the All-Gods come hither with protection. May we possess all property and riches,
32 May our strength fill the regions seven, fill the four distant places full. Here may our riches guard us with the All-Gods in the gain of wealth,
88 May strength’ to-day procure for us donation: strength range the Gods together with the Seasons. Yea, strength hath made me rich in store of heroes. As lord of strength may I gain all the regions,
34 Strength be before us, in the midst among us, May strength exalt the Gods with our oblation. Yea, strength hath made me rich in store of heroes, As lord of strength may I gain all the regions,
35 With milk of Prithivi do I unite me, unite myself with waters and with plants. As such may I gain strength, O Agni.
36 Store milk.in earth and milk in plants, milk in the sky and milk in air. Teeming with milk for me be all the regions.
37 ‘Thee by the radiant Savitar’s impulsion, with arms of Agvins, with the hands of Pashan, Controlled by Vak Sarasvati’s Controller, with Agni’s sole dominion I besprinkle.
38 Maintainer of Law, true by nature, Agni is the Gandharva. ‘Yhe plants are his Apsarases, namely Delights. May he protect this our Priesthood and Nobility, To him All- hail! Ave! To those All-bail!
39 The Conjoined, Vigvasiman, Sfrya is the Gandharva, His motes are hig Apearases, Swift-moving. May he protect, etc., as in 38,
40 The Highly-Blessed, the Moon whose rays are like the Sun’s, isthe Gandharva. The Asterisms are his Apsarases, Lum- inous. May he protect, etc.
41 The Quick, All-reaching, Wind is the Gandharva. The Waters ure his Apsarases, named Energies. May he pro- tect, etc,
42 The Protecting, Strong-winged, Sacrifice is the Gandharva, Guerdons are bis Apsarasea, called Praisers. May he pro- tect, ete.
43 The Lord of Creatures, Omnific, Mind is the Gandharva, Richas and Samans are his Apsarases, called Wishings, May he protect, ete. "
44 Lord of the World, Prajapati, whose sce the homes above and here, Give great protection unto these, the Priesthood and Nobility.
45 Thou art the vapoury sea that giveth moisture, Blow on me, thou, healthful and blessiug-laden. Thou art the Maruts’ own, the dand of Maryts. Blow on me, etc. Seeker of aid art thou, receiving worship. Blow on me, ete,
46 Thy lights, O Agui, in the Sua, etc,, as in XIII. 22.
47 Lights of yours in the Sun, 0 Gods, eto., as in XIII. 23.
48 Give lustre to our holy priests, set lustre in our raling chiefs : Lustre to Vaigyas, Sddras : give, through lustre; lustre unto me.
49 I ask this of thee with my prayer, adoring‘ thy worshipper asks this with his oblations. Varuna, stay thou here and be not angry : steal not our life from us, O thou Wide-Ruler.
50 Heavenlike is Warmth, Hail! Heaven-like is Arka, Hail! Heaven-like is the Bright One, Hail! Heaven-like is Light, Hail! Heaven-like is Sarya, Hail !
51 I yoke with power and flowing butter Agni, divine, strong- pinioned, great with vital vigour. Through him may we approach the Bright One’s station, ascending to the loftiest sky, to heaven.
52 With these thy two ne’er-wastiug feathered pinions where- with thou drivest fiends away, O Agni, Let us fly to the regions of the pious whither have gone the first-born anciert Rishis.
53 The Drop, the poverful, the falcon, righteous, impetuous bird borne on his golden pinions, Great, stedfast, settlei in the habitation—sto thee be rever- ence! Forbear to harm me!
54 Centre of earth, heaver’s head art thou, essence of waters and of plants. Eternal, far-spread refuge. Homage to the Path!
55 Attached thou standest at the head of all the world. Thy heart is in the sea, thy life is in the floods. Give water : cleave the reservoir. Help us with rain sent from the sky, Purjanya, firmament, or earth,
56 By Bhrigns aud by Vasus hath prayer-granting sacrifice been pnid. Come, Wealth, into the house of him our dear, our well- beloved on
57 May Agni, served with sacrifice and gifts, protect our offered food : This homage be Good-speed to Gods !
68 That which hath flowed from purpose or from judgment, or gathered from the wind or fron the vision, Follow ye to the region of the pious whither have gone the first-born ancient Rishis:
59 Tothee I trust this man, Celestial Dwelling! treasure which J&tavedas shall bring hither. After you will the Sacrificer follow. Here recognize him in the highest heaven.
60 Acknowledge him, ye Gods, in highest heaven. Ye who are present, know the shape he weareth. When he approacheth by the God-ward pathways, reveal to him the meed of pious actions, ;
61 Wake up, O Agni, etc, as in XV. 54,
62 Convey out sacrifice to heaven, etc., as iti XV. 55.
63 With Darbba-bunch, with fencing-wood, with spoon, with altar, holy grass, With luud, lead this our sacrifice to go to heaven among the Gods.
64 Our gifts, our charitable grants, our plots works, our fees to priests, May the Omuific's Agni set all this among the Gods in heaven.
74 Help ns thut we may yain this wish, O Agni, gain riches, Wealthy One! with store of heroes. Desiring strength from thee may we be strengthened, and win, Eternal! thine eternal glory.
75 Approaching with raised hands and adoration, we have this day fulfilled for thee thy longing. Worship the Gods with most devoted spirit as Priest with no unfriendly thought, O Agni.
76 Home-hider Agni, Indra, and Brahma, and bright Brihas- pati— May the All-Gods, one-minded, guard.our sacrifice in happy place.
