I rage within me Agni first, for increase of my wealth, good offspring, manly strength : So may the Deities wait on me.
ocean as it swells and surges, Waxing to greatness, resting on the lotus, spread forth in amplitude with heaven’s own measure.
3 Eastward at first was Brahma generated. Vena o’erspread the bright Ones from the summit, Disclosed his deepest nearest revelations, womb of existent and of non-existent.
4 In the beginning rose Hirapyagarbha, born Only Lord of all created being. He fixed and Holdeth up this earth and heaven. Worship we Ka the God with our oblation.
5 The Drop leaped onward through the earth and heaven; along this place and that which was before it. ‘This Book contains formulas for the laying down of the Lotus-leaf, the solemn setting of various bricks, the burial of the Tortoise, the disposal of the Victims’ Heads, and other ceremonies counected with the construction of the Ahavantya Fire-altar. oblation aud recites the text. J take Agni: fia order that Agni, that is, the Fire-Altar, may be made oat i ‘Agni hime! xa He lays down a lotus: cal ranting the , ona tuft of grass, with the text which is repeated from XI. 29, ae ‘XIL 1), with the text from A. V. IV. 1.1. Brahma: or the Prayer. Prayer originated in the eastern heaven: when Vena, the Loving One, the ely Sun, first rose in his glory he poured forth the type of aman prayer, his morning song of joy and praise. See.III. 8, note, Acco! Mabidhara, Brabwa here is the Sun. Drerspreed the Bright Ones: of, ed bright flashes. According to Mahidhara, the Bright Ones are the ‘monde Non- existent : but possessing the ality of future existence, his face eastward, » symbol of Prajapati, Agni, and the Sacrificer, tad re cites the two texts taken respectively from R. V. X. 131. 1, and, with varj- ations, from R. V. X.17. 11. Hirunyagarbha: ‘the Gold Germ,’ ‘Soures of Golden igh the Sun-God identified with Prajtpati, a; Prajapati (other than Prajépati) shall we adore with our oblation? 3, 6, 7 The Drop: meaning, say the Commentators, Aditya, the Sun. Oblutions : hotrds, weaning, it is said, th inn a tho se thus establishes the Sun in heaven. " See Sacred Books of the Kast, P. 368, The Secrificer stands by the golden figure worshipping with three following formule, | Serpente: vetwohfmm wldremel 2 as powerful superhuman beings, A. V. III. 26.27. Demons’ darts: Rakshasas aud other evil beings to bite and kill men, T offer up, throughout the seven oblations, the Drop still moving to the common dwelling.
6 Homage be paid to Serpents unto all of them that are on earth, Is To those that dwell in air, to those that dwell in sky be homage paid.
7 To those'that are the demons’ darts, to those that live upon e trees, To all the Serpents that lie low in holes be adoration paid.
8 Or those that are in heaven’s bright sphere, or those that dwell in the Sun’s beams : Serpents, whose home has been prepared in waters, homage unto them !
9 Put forth like a wide-spreading net thy vigour: go likes mighty King with his attendants, Thou, following thy swift net, shootest arrows: transfiz the fiends with darts that burn most
10 Forth go in rapid flight thy whirling mace follow them “closely glowing in thy fury. Spread with thy tongue the winged flames, 0 unfet- tered cast thy firebrands all around thee. ae 1] Send thy spies forward, floetest in thy motion: be, ne’er deceived, the guardian of this people From him who, near or far, is bent ‘on evil, and let no trouble sent from thee: 0%
12 Rise O Agni, spread thee out aia aa bara aves GaP foont thou who hast sht ied arrows. Him, blazing Agni! who hath worked us mischief, consume ‘thou utterly like dried-up stubble.
13 Rise, Agni, drive off those who fight against us: make manifest thine own celestial vigour. Slacken the strong bows of the demou-driven ; destroy our foemen whether kin or stranger. I settle thee with Agni’s fiery ardour. In-re ldleful, reciting fv text demonalapingcbarme, taken froth. .
13 Demon-driven: those whom evil ita incite to attack us. J settle thee: with this formula he lays down on the south side s ladle made of the wood of the Karshmarya tree(Gmelina Arbores filled with olarified butter,
14 Agni is head and height of heaven, the Master of the earth is he: He quickeneth the waters’ seed. I settle thee with the great strength of Indra.
15 Thou ‘art the leader of the rite and region to which with thine auspicious teams thou tendest. Thy light-bestowing head to heaven thou liftest, making thy tongue the oblation-bearer, Agni !
16 Steady art thou, sustainer, laid by Vigvakarman in thy place, tet uit the ocean nor the bird harm thee: unshaking, steady earth,
17 Thee let Prajapati settle on the waters’ back, in Ocean's course, Thee. the capacious, widely spread. Thou art the Wide One: spread thee wide!
18 Thou art the earth, the ground, thou art the all-sustaining Aditi, she who supporteth all the world. Control the earth, steady the earth, do thou the earth no injury.
19 For all breath, out-breath, through-breath, upward-breath- ue for high position, for prescribed observance, May Agni keep thea safe with great well-being, with the securest shelter. As aforetime with Angiras, with that Deity lie steady.
20 Upspringing from thine every joint, upspringing from each knot of thine,
34 Firm art thon, a sustainer. Hence engendered, forth from these wombs at first came Jatavedas. By Gayatri, by Trishtup, by Anushtup, may he who knows bear to the Gods oblation.
35 Take thou thine ease for food, for store of riches, for might in splendour, and for strength and offspring. Thou art all-ruling, independent Buler: both fountains of Sarasvati protect thee !
36 © radiant Agni, harness thou thy steeds which are most ex- cellent ! They bear thee as thy spirit wills.
37 atest Agni, as a charioteer, thy steeds who best invoke the ‘ode : As ancient Hotar take thy seat.
38 Like rivers our libations flow together, cleansing themselves in inmost heart aud spirit. , I look upon the flowing streams of butter: the golden reed is in the midst of Agni.
39 Thee for the praise-verse, thee for sheen, thee for bright splendour, thee for light. This hath beoome the energetic spirit of all the world and of Vaisvanara Agni.
40 Asti, siblominous with light, splendid with splendour, golden Giver of thousands art thou: for e thousand thee.
36 Having first silently placed the Fire-pan on the mortar he pounds the prepared clay and throws it on the ground before the Fire-paa which is then eet upon it with the two following formulas, Firm art thou: see verse 16,
35 Both fountaine: Mind and Speech ; according to Mahtdhars, the Rigveda and the Stmaveds.
86 Ho offers two cations on the Firepan with two texte taken reape- ively from R, V. VI. 16, 43 and VIIL 64.1. ‘
38 The heads of the victims slaughtered for the ceremony were set: aside atan early stage of the proceedings, and he now thrusts a aplintar of gold, tthe symbol of purity and immortality, into the mouth of each, with the text taken, with transposition and a variation, from R. V. IV. 58.'6, 6. The gal- den reed: the golden figure of a man (vee verse 4). Agni: here meaning the Fire-altar, + ‘for praise’: Rggeling. He thrasts a left nostril, For Ree the right the rij eye. For light : into the left eye. gold is trust into the left ear,
40 With the first line he thrusta a splinter of gold into each victim's | right ear. Giver of thousands: he addresses the golden figure's heed which | he takes up end deposits, with the other beads, in the Fire-paa.
41 Balm thou with milk the unborn babe Aditya, wearing all forms, creator of a thousand. Spare him with heat, nor plot against him: give him a
42 The wind’s impetuous rush, Varuna’s navel! the horse that springs to life amid the waters! The rivers’ tawny child, based on the mountain, harm not, ’ 0 Agni, in the loftiest region.
43 Unwasting Drop, red, enger, pressing forward, Agni I worship with repeated homage. Forming thyself with joints in proper order, harm not the Cow, Aditi widely ruling!
44 Her who is Tvashtar’s guardian, Varuna’s navel, the Ewe brought forth from out the loftiest region, The Asura’s mighty thousandfold coutrivance, injure not in the highest sphere, O Agni.
45 The Agni who from Agni had his being, from heat of Earth or algo heut of Heaven, 7 Whereby the Omnific One engendered creatures, him may thy fierce displeasure spare, O Agni.
46 The brilliant presence of the Gods hath risen, the eye of Mitra, Varuna, and Agui. The soul of all that moveth not or moveth, the Sun hath filled the air, and earth and heaven.
47 Injure not, thousand-eyed, while thou art building for sacri- fiee, this animal, the biped. . 7
41 With milk: with reference to the milk, representing wealtia in cattle, put into the Fire-pan with the eand mentioned in II. 61, note. Aditya: the Sun, that is, Agni of the Fire-altar. Wearing all forms: regarded as the Sun. Him’: the Sacrificer. va42 He pats the horse's head on the north-east side, and recites the text, '43 He pute the ox’s head on the south-east side, and recites the text ‘The Drop ix Soma represented by the ox.
44 The ram's head is silly on the north-west sidé. Teashtar’s guardian: an providing warm clothing for hutoan beings created by him, Asura’s : the Divine Being’. But see 8. B. E. XLI. 406, Thousandfold > infinitely precious, or fit for a thousand services.
45 On the south-western side he puts the head of the he-goat. The Agni: i the form of the goat. From Agni: that is Prajépati. : by the goat (or, by the Birthless) reprosenting ‘Vak, Speech, the Word, by which the Ounitic Prajapati created all things. See Weber, Indische Studien, IX.
473 oq, ond Muir, Original Sanskrit ‘Texts, V. 891.
46 He offers an oblation on the human herd, or head of the figure, recit- ing the text, repeated from VII. 42, taken from R. V, I. 115, 1.
47 After worshipping be removes the human head, reciting the tex. Pith: or marrow, the essential part of sacrificial food. Man's counterfeit ¢ mays is explained by kimpurusha, perhaps, monkey. P the bead of ® puppet or doll, representing a man, is intended, See XL 16, note. -- Acoept as pith man’s counterfeit the victim, Agni: therewith building thy forms, be settled. Let thy flame teach man’s counterfeit: let thy flame reach the man we hate.
48 Harm. not this animal whose hooves are solid, the courser neighing in the midst of coursers, I dedicate to thee the forest Gaura: building thy bodies up ‘ with him be settled. Let thy flame reach the Gaura, let thy flame reach him whom we detest.
49 Thousandfuld, with a hundred streams, this fountain, ex- panded in the middle of the waters, Tnfiuite, yielding butter for the people, harm not, O Agni, ‘in the highest tegion. . This wild bull of the forest. I assign thee: building thy bodies up therewith be settled. Let thy flame reach the wild bull, eto. (as in 48).
50 This creature clothed in wool, Varuna’s navel, the skin of animals quadraped and biped, The first that was produced of Tvashtar’s creatures, O Agni, harm not in the highest region. The forest buffalo do I assign thee: building, eto., as above mutato mutando,
51 From Agni’s warmth the he-goat bad his being : he looked at first upon his generator. Thereby the Gods at first attained to Godhead: those meet for worship to the height ascended. The forest Sarabha do | assign thee: building, eto. 52. Do thou, Most Youthful God, protect the men who offer, hear their songs, - Protect his offspring and himself. 48. He removes the horse's head. Gaura: the Gaur or Gour (Bos Gaurus), a species of wild ox. Gavaya ; the Gayal (Bos Gavaeus).
50 He removes the head of the ram. Skin: provider of clothing. Qua- drupeds : horses, cows, mules, etc.
51 He removes the head of the he-goat. Agai's warmth: meaning Pra- jdpati’s. Thereby : by the gut (or the Birthless). See v. 45, note. Sarudhu: a mythicnl eight-legged animal, supposed to live on the Snowy Mountains ‘aod to equal or surpass the lion in strength, like our unicorn,
52 He worships the half-finished Fire-altar with the text from R. V: TITL 78. 8. The men who afer or, the Sacrificer's men. His: The present ‘Sacrificer’s.
122 THE TEXTS OP THE BOOR XII. swelling of the waters. I set thee in the ashes of the pwaters. I set thee in the lustre of the waters. I set thee in the way which waters travel. I set thee in the flood, the place to rest in. I set thee in the sea, the place to rest in. I set thee in the stream, the place to rest in. Iset thee in the water's habitation. I set thee in the resting-place of waters. I set thee in the station of the waters, I set thee in the meeting-place of waters. I set thee in the birthplace of the waters. I set thee in the refuse of the waters. I set thee in the residence of waters. I settle thee with the Gayatri motre. I settle thee with the Trishtup metre. I settle thes with the Jagati metre. I settle thee with the Anushtup metre. I settle thee with the Pankti metre.
54 This, in front, is Bhuva. His offspring, Breath, is Bhauva- yana. Spring is Pragiyana, The Gayutriis the daughter of Spring. From the Gayatri comes the Giyatra tune. From the Giyatra the Upimgu. From the Updmeu the Trivrit. From the Trivgit the Rathantara. The Rishi Vasishtha, By thee, taken by Prajapati, I take vital \veath for creatures,
55 This on the right, the Omnific. His, the Omnific’s offspring, Mind. Summer.sprang from Mind. The Trishtup is the danghter of Sammer. From the Trishtup came the Svar song. From the Svira the Antaryima, From the An- taryama the Pafichadaga, From the Pafichadasa the Brihat. The Rishi Bharadvaja, By thee, taken by Pra- japati, T take Mind for orestures,
58 He mounts on the altar behind the porous brick end lays down the Apuyés, or Watery, bricks, five in each quarter, corresponding with the number of the sacrificial victims, and addresses a formule to ‘explained as the wind. Swelling: the plants, Ashes: foam. Lustre: lightaing Way : the earth, Flood: the Treath, Sea: the mind. Stream: A tation : the eye. Resting-place: the ear. Station: the sy. the air. Birthplace: the sea, Refuse: sand. Residence: food. I settle: he then wa four Chhandasyds, or Metre, bricks, with a formula for each. down the Prinabbritas, or Breath-supporting, brio«s, two s a time, with a formula for each set. Bhuva: a name of Agni; ‘the Exie tent’: Eggeling. Bhaurdyana: eprung from the Existeut; or Mundane. Prdndyana: sprung from breath, Updmyu: see VI. 80 0q, Trivrit: the nine-verse hymn, Vasishtha: meaning the vital breath, the word signity~ ing best, most precious. “Taken: created, or established. Omnific: meaning Vayu the Wind-God. Svdra: a Saman that has the svara, or first rising and then falling pitch of the final vowel, for ite finale, Antaryéma: a Soma op anion. See VIL. 4, note. Putohadapa + @ hymn with ‘hoon versoe aradvdja: another famous Vedio Itishi, here meauing Mind. Embracer's offepring, the Eye. The Rains sprang from the Eye. The Jagati is the daughter of the Rains. From the Jagati came the Riksama, From the Riksama the Sukra, From the Sukra the Saptadag.. From the Saptaduga the Vairipa. The Rishi Jamadagni. By thee, taken by Prajapati, I take the Eye for ereatures,
57 This on the north side, heaven. This, heaveu’s offspring, the Ear. Autumn, the daughter of the Ear. The Anush- tup sprang from Antumno. From the Anushtup came the Aida, From the Aids the Manthin. From the Manthin the Ekavimga. From the Ekavispsa the Vairaja. The Rishi Vigvamitra. By thee, taken by Prajapati, I take the Ear for creatures.
