3 Who by his grandeur hath become sole Ruler of all the
moving world that breathes and slumbers ; He who is Sovran, of these men and. cattle—what God shall. © we adore with our oblation ?
4 Taken upon a base art thou,, I take thee welcome to:Prajapatii, This is thy place : the Moon thx majesty. Thy majesty that has. accrued to thee by night, in.a year,, thy majesty that has accrued in the earth, in Agni, inthe stars.and in the Moon, to tha majesty of thine, to Praja:. pati,and, to the Gods, All-hail:! § They who stand round him.as he moves harness. the bright, the xuddy Steed: ‘The lights are shining in the.sky.
6 On both sides to,the.car-they yoke: the. two. Bag- Courserm dear to him, Bold, tawny, bearers of the Chief: Tundra loves, the fload, Again, O singer, by this path bring thou our Courser hither~ ward, "Whe cerempnies subsequent, to thereturn ofthe Horse from, hie wanda ings are continued. the name of the.golden vessels in which. they are presented, and recites. the. text, repeated from XIII. 4, taken from R. VX 121. 1. Airanyagarbhe : the Gold-Germ, or Golden Child ; Prajapati, with whom the Sacrificial Horse is identified, the Sun's,
8 Taken from R. V. X. 121.3. What God,?: other thap,Prajipati. Or, according to Mahtdhara : Worship.we Ka the.God. See 1. 6, note, RV.L6.1.
6 Three other horses are harnessed to the same chariot, with the text from R. V: I. 6. 2. % The flood: the water to which the Horae-is driven. to be bathed,
8 Let the Vasus anoint thee with Gayatri metre. Let the Rudrasanoint thee with Trishtup metre. Let the Adityas anoint thee with Ingati metre. Kerth! Ether! Heaven ! O Gods, eat this food, parched grains and groats in the product ef barley and in the product of cows: eat this food, Prajipati.
9 Who moreth smgle and alone? Who is brought forth to life again } What is the remedy of cold, or what the great receptacle ¢
10 The Sun moves single and alone: ‘Fhe Moon ix brought to life again. Fire is the remedy of cold ;: Earth is the great’ receptacle: Hi What was the antecedent thought?’ What was the: bird of mighty size? The slippery matron, who was she? Who: was the reddish- coloured one? ¥2 Heaven was the autecedent thought. The Courser was the: mighty bird. The slippery matrom was-the earth, Night was the reddish- coloured one.
13 Vayu help thee with cooked viands! Blackneck with: goats ;: Nyagrodh with: cups; Silmali with increase; this Stal- lion bere, good for the chariot—let him verily come with his four feet. Brahmakrishno. belp-us! Obsisauce to Agni! and two other royal Cunsorts anoint him with olarified butter, reciting theic~ respective formulas, The-Chief’Queen anointa the fore-quaeters, and the others the barrel and hind-quarters. Barth! ete: : with these sacrificial ex- clamations the three Queens. rexpectively, entwine the hair of the Horse's head, neck, and tail with chains or other ornaments of gold. O Goder the S.crificer offers the Horse the-remains of the night-oblation: of grain, whichy is thrown into the water if he refuses to ext it. Prodict” of cows : thesour gurde with which the oblation-ras mixed. Prajdpedi - meaning the deifed rae. costaogonical and myatic-theological doctrine The questions-xre couched in designedly enigmaxtical Tanguage. constituting a sort of ‘ cosmic charade,’ as Prof. M Bloomfield calla it.. Who moveth ;. ete. :. the Bralman. questions: the Hotar.
11 The Hotar questions the Brahman.
12 The Brahman replies: Heaven: meaning rain; according to Mahflhara, The Courser: the Sacrificial Horse: Miyhty bird: | that carries the sacrifice- of himself to heaven. Eurth: Mahidhara's explanation of avil’ (sheep 3 woollen cloth; Soma-strainer). Slippery : after rain,
13 The Horse, a hornless he-goat, and a Gomriga or wild ox (Bos Gavaeus)) are bund to-eacrificial stakes uear the fire, auu.xeventeen. other victins,.a
14 The car is fitted with the rein, the steed is fitted with the rein, Fitted iu waters, water-born, is Brahma following Soma’s lead,
15 Steed, from thy body, of thyself, sacrifice and accept thyself, Thy greatness can be gained by none but thee.
16 No, here thou diest not, thou art not injured; only by fajr paths to the Gods thon goest, May Savitar the God in that world place thee where dwell the pious, whether they have journeyed.
17 Agni was the victim, With him they sacrificed. He won this world in which Agni is. This shall become thy world, This shalt thoa win, Drink these waters. Vayu was the victim. With him they sacrificed. He won this world in which Vayu is. This shall become, etc., as above. Sdrya was the victim, etc. He won the world in which Sarya is. This shall become, etc.
18 To vital breath, Hail! To ont-breathing, Hail! To diffusive breath, Hail ! Ambi! Ambika’! Amb§lik§! No one js taking me away. The sorry horse will lie beside another, as Subhadré the dweller in Kampila.
19 Thee we ivoke, troop-lord of troops, Thee we invoke, the loved ones’ lord. Thee, lord of treasures, we invoke, My precious wealth! .
32 Now have f glorified with praise strong Dadhikravan, eon- quering steed. Sweet may he make our niouths: may he prolong the days we have to live.
83 Gayatet, Trishtup, Javati, and Paikt? with Avushtup joined, Bribati, Kuknp, Ushniha pacify thee witl needle-points !
34 Two-footed, those that have four feet, thove with three feet. and those with five, Metreless, with one metre, these pacify thee with needle- points !
35 May Muhindmnis, Revatiy, all far-spread Regions of the sky, Voices, and lightnings from the eloud pacify thee with needle~ points f
36 May married dames of human birth skilfully separate thy hair : The Regions, Comsorts of the Gods, pacify thee with meedle- points } mulas. The Chief Queen then begiue the performance of the revolting ceremony, : the following nine stanzas are not reproducible even in the semi-obecurity of a learned European language ; and stanzas 30, 31 would be unintelligi- ble without them,
82 On the following morning’ the officiating priests rise the Chief Queen from the place where she has spent the night, and recite the text, taken from R. V. IV. 89. 6, to purify their mouths after the aboutinable obsceni- ties which they have uttered. Dudhikrdvan : or in theahorter form, Dad! kris or Dadhikra, described as a kind of divine or deified horse, and provab- ly, like Tarkshya (XV. 18), a personification of the morning sun. The verse is called the Dadhikrt, and is used ae a purifier after foul language. Cf. ‘The Hyums of the Atharva-Veda, Vol. II. Appendix, p. 457,
83 The three Queens with = hundred amd ove needles, gold, silver and copper, mark out the lines, on the body of the horse, which the dissector’s knife is to follow. Pucify : or, sond to rest ; a sacrificial euphemism.
384 Two-footed : dvipadés ; verses with two padas or metrical divisions, With one metre: having the same metre throughout.
85 Mahdndmnte: whose name is great; nine verses of the Stmaveda in Bakvart metre, Revatte : verses from which the Raivata Siman is formed, eo named from B. V. I. 30. 18 in which the word revutt, aplendid, ur wealthy, occurs,
37 They, made of silver, gold, and lead, are used 98 helpers éa the work, As lines on the strong Courser’s skin may they console and give thee rest.
38 What then? As men whose fields ere full of barley, etc, a8 in X. 32,
39 Who flays thee? Who dissects thee? Whe prepares:thy limbs for sacrifice t Who is the Suge that slaughters thee ?
40 In due time let the seasons as thy Slaughterers divide thy joints, And with the splendour of the Year sacrifice thee with holy rites,
41 Let the Half-months aud let the Mouths, while sserifieing, flay thy limbs: Let Duy and Night and Maruts mend each fault in sacrificing thee. Se
42 Let the divine Adbvaryus flay thy body and disseot thy frame, And let the saerifieing lines prepare thy members jeint by joint.
43 May Sky, Earth, Air, and Wind supply each failing and de- fect of thine: May Strya with the Stars of heaven. duly prepare a world for thee. A4 Well be it with thine upper parte, well be it with the parts belows ‘Well be is with thy bones and with thy marrow and with all thy frame!
45 Whe moveth singly? ete, a6 in werse 9,
46 The Sun moves singly, etc., as in verse 10,
47 What lustre is like Sirya’s light ? What lake is equal te the Seat What is more spacious than the Earth? What thing is that which naught can mete ?
48 Brahma is lustre like the Sun. Heaven is a flood to match the Sea. Indra is vaster than the Earth. Beyond all measure is the Cow.
49 Friend of the Gods, T ask, for information, if thou in spirit hast obtained the knowledge, Hath Vishnu this whele Universe pervaded in the three steps wherein the God is worshipped $0 I-also um in those three steps of Vishnu wherewith this Uni- verse he permeated. The earth and heaven I circle ina moment and this heaven's summit with a single organ. $1 What are the things which Purasha hath entered? What tings hath Purasha contained within him? Thie riddle we propound to thee, O Brahman. Why dest thou give no answer to my question? $2 Within five thiags hath Purusha found entrance: these Parusha hath within himself connected. This is the thought which I retura in answer. Thou art not my superior in wisdom. $¢ Heaven was the antecedent thought, etc. as in 12.
55 Who, tell me, is the yellowish she? Who is tho darkly- yellowish $ Who moves with rapid spring and bound? Who glides and winds along the path?
56 Tho she-goat, Sir, is yellowiah, dark-yellowish is the poreu pine. The hare moves swift with leap and bound : the snake creeps winding on the path.
57 How many different forms bath this, how many ayllables, burnt-oblations, brands for kindling ? Here, of the rites of sacrifice I ask thee. How many Hotaxs in due season worship ?
58 Sixfold its form, its syllables a hundred, eighty burnt-offer ings, just three brands for kindling. To thee [ tell the rites of sacrificing. Seven Hotars worship in appointed season.
59 Who knoweth this world’s central point 1 Who knoweth the heaven, the earth, and the wide air between them ? Who knows the birthplace of the mighty Sarya.} Who knows the Moon, whence he was generated ¢
60 I know the centre of the worldabout us. I know heaven, earth, and the wide air between them. I know the birthplace of the mighty Sirya. I know the Moon, whence he was generated.
61 I ask thee of the earth’s extremest limit, where is the oen- tre of the world, I ask thee. Lask thee of the Stallion’s genial humour, I ask of highest heaven where Speech abideth.
62 This altar is the earth’s extremest limit; this sacrifice of ours is the world’s centre. This Soma is the Stallion’s genial humour, this Brabmam highest heaven: where Speech abideth. ‘86 The Hotar replies. The she-yoat: ajé here is explained by Mabtdhare (who takes the word in the sense of bicthless) as Maya, Illusion, phenome- nal Nature ; or Night.
57 The Brahman questions the Udgttar. Forme : according to Mahfdha- ra, viands or kinds of food. This : sacrifice.
53 Sizfold : according to Mahtdhara, referring to the six principal tastes, sweet, bitter, salt, ete, Syllables: of the sacred metres, twenty-four of the Giyatrt, ete. Burnt oblations: meaning kinds of victims for such offerings. Eighty: four tied to each of twenty stakea Seven Hoturs: the Hotar, Mai- trivaruga, Achchhavika, Grivastat, Brahmayachchhamst, Agntdhra, Potar:
59 The Udgitar questions the Brahman, who replies in the following: verse.
61 The Snorificer questions the Adhvaryu, The verse is taken from R. V. L 164. 34.
62 This altar: as the place nearest heaven, the place where the Gods. visit men. The Stallion: Dyaus or Heaven, whose genial humour is the fertilizing rain which impregnates theearth. This Brahman: who recites the texts of the Voda representa the abiding-place of Speeeh, or the Ward, VERSE 65} WHITE YASURVEDA. nz
63 The Strong, the Self-existent One, the First, within the mighty flood Laid down the timely embryo from which Prajépati was born.
64 Let the Hotar sacrifice to Prajapati from the Mahiman-Soma, Let him acvept. Let him drink the Soma. Hotar, sacrifice.
