2 To Agni Jatavedas, to the flame, the well-enkindled God,
Offer thick sacrificial oil.
3 Thee, such, O Angiras, with brands and sacred oil we magnify, O very brilliant, Youthfullest.
4 Rich in oblations, dropping oil, to thee, sweet Agni, let them go. Accept with favour these my brands.
5 Earth! Ether! Sky! Like heaven in plenty and like earth in compass ! Upon thy back, Earth, place of savrificing to Gods, for gain of food I lay food-eating Agni.
6 This spotted Bull hath come and sat before the Mother and before The Father, mounting up to heaven.
7 As expiration from his breath his radiance penetrates within : The Bull shines out through all the sky.
8 He rules supreme through thirty realms, Song is bestowed upon the Bird Throughout the days at break of morn,
9 Agni is light, and light is Agni. Hail ! Sarya is light, and light is Sirya, Hail ! Agni is splendour, light is splendour. Hail ! Stirya is splendour, light is splendour. Hail ! Light is Sirya, Sirya is light. Hail !
10 Accordant with bright Savitar and Night with Indra at her side, May Agni, being pleased, enjoy. All-hail ! Approaching sacrifice, may we pronounce a text to Agni who Heareth us even when afar. Agui is head and height of heaven, the Master of the earth is he: He quickeneth the waters’ seed.
13 You two will I invoke, O Indra-Agni, will please you both together with oblation. Givers, you twain, of vigorous strength and riches, you twain do I invoke for gain of vigour.
14 This is thine ordered place of birth whence, sprung to life, thou shonest forth. Knowing this, Agni, rise thou up and cause our riches to increase.
15 Here by ordainers was this God appointed first Invoker, best at worship, to be praised at rites, Whom Apnavana and the Bhrigus caused to shine, bright- coloured in the wood, spreading to every house. 1 1 wy
16 After his ancient splendour they, the bold, have drawn the bright milk from The Sage who wins a thousand gifts.
17 Thou, Agni, art our bodies’ guard. Guard thou my body. Giver of life art thou, O Agni. Give me life. Giver of spleudour art thou, Agni. Give me splendour. All that is wanting in my body, Agni, supply for me.
18 Enkindled we enkindle thee through hundred winters, thee the bright; We healthy, thee who givest health; we strong, thee author of our strength ; We, never injured, Agni, thee uninjured injurer of foes. Orich in shining lights, may I in safety rich the end of thee.
19 Thou hast attained, O Agni, to the splendour of Sarya, to the eulogy of Rishis, aud to the habitation which thou lovest. May I attain to lengthened life, to splendour, to offspring and abundant store of riches.
20 Ye are food, may I enjoy your food. Ye are might, may I enjoy your might. Ye are energy, may I enjoy your energy. Ye are abundant riches, may I enjoy your abuu- dant riches,
21 Sport, wealthy ones, in this abode, this fold, this spot, this dwelling-place. Remain just here, and go not hence.
22 Composed art thou of every form and colour. With sap and ownership of kine approach me. To thee, dispeller of the night, 0 Agni, day by day with prayer, Bringing thee reverence, we come ;
23 Ruler of sacrifices, guard of Law eternal, radiant One, Increasing in thine own abode.
24 Be to us easy of approach, even as a father to his son: Agni, be with us for our weal.
25 O Agni, be our nearest Friend; be thou a kind deliverer and gracious Friend. Excellent Agni, come thou nigh to us, and give us wealth most splendidly renowned.
26 To thee then, O most bright, O radiant God, we come with prayer for happiness for our friends. So hear us, listen to this call of ours, and keep us far from every evil man.
27 O Ida, come, O Aditi, come hither. Come hither, much- desired! From you may I obtain my heart’s desire.
28 O Brahmanaspati, make him who presses Soma glorious, Even Kukshivan Ausija.
29 Therich, the healer of disease, who findeth wealth, increaseth store, The prompt,—may he be with us still.
30 Let not the foeman’s curse, let not a mortal’s treachery fall on us: Preserve us, Brahmanaspati !
31 Great, heavenly, unassailable, ours be the favour of the Three, Aryaman, Mitra, Varuna,
32 For over them, neither at home nor upon pathways perilous, The evil-minded foe hath power.
33 For they, the Sons of Aditi, bestow eternal light upon A mortal man that he may live.
34 Ne’er art thou fruitless, Indra, ne’er dost thou forsake thy worshipper. But now. O Liberal Lord, thy bounty as a God is ever pour- ed forth more and more.
35 May we attain that excellent glory of Savitar the God : So may he stimulate our prayers.
36 May thine inviolable car wherewith thou guardest worship- pers Come near to us from every side,
37 Earth! Ether! Sky! May I be rich in offspring, well-man- ned with men and opulent with riches. Friendly to men! do thou protect my offspring. Worthy of praise! do thou protect my cattle. © pointed One, protect the food that feeds me.
38 We have approached the Omniscient, best finder-out of wealth for us. Splendour and strength bestow on us, O Agni, thou Imperial Lord.
39 Lord of the Home, this Agni Garhapatya is best at finding riches for our children. Splendour and strength bestow on us, O Agni, Master of the Home.
40 Rich, furtherer of plenty is this Agni, Master of the Herd. Splendour and strength bestow on us, O Agui, Master of the Herd. 4l Fear not, nor tremble thou, 0 House. To thee who bearest strength we come. taken from R. V., Valakhilya, 3. 7. par excellence, ‘the celebrated verse of the Vedas which forms part of the daily devotions of the Brahmans. and wae first made known to English readers by Sir William Jones's translation of a paraphrastic interpretation : be renders it, Let us adore the eupremacy of that divine sun who illumin- ates all, from whom gll proceed, to whom all must returu, whom we invoke to direct our understandings aright in our progress towards his holy seat.’ Wilson. See Rigveda Sanhita, Vol. II. p. 111. Prayers: or, thoughts.
87 Earth! etc,: eee 1.5, Friendly to men: he approaches and addresses the Girhapatya fire. Pointed One: flame of the fire.
40 Master of the Herd; purishya; the original meaning of purisha is rub- bish, loose soil, manure, and is used symbolically for the cattle which pro- duce the manure. 41—43 Formulas to be used by the householder on approaching the Dak- ebipa fire on departing from aud returning to his house. Fear not: in the master’s absence, I, bearing strength, intelligent and happy, come to thee, House, rejoicing in my spirit.
42 The home on which the wanderer thinks, where cheerfulness and joy abound— We call the Home to welcome us, May it know us who know it well.
43 Here have the cows been called to us, the goats and sheep have been called near, And in our home we have addressed the meath that sweeten- eth our food. I come to thee for safety and for quiet. May joy be ours, felicity, and blessing,
44 We invocate the Maruts, the voracious, eaters of their foes, Delighting in their mess of meal.
45 We expiate by sacrifice each sinful act that we have done, Whether in village or the wild, in company or corporeal sense. Svaba!
46 Let us not here contend with Gods, O Indra, for, Fierce. One! here is thine own sacred portion, Thine, Mighty Oue, whose friends, the bounteous Maruts, his song who pours oblation, streamlike, honours,
47 The skilful workers have performed their work with voice that gives delight. Having performed the work for Gods, go, ye companions, to your home.
48 O ever-moving Cleansing Bath, thou movest gliding on thy way. ning of Spring, the Rains, and Autumn, The Sacrificer’s wife is first called upon to confess her infidelities, if ehe has been guilty of any, and to declare the uame or names of her lover or lovers. After confession, or declaration of innocence, she is made to recite the text. Eaters: consumers, destroyers. The correctness of this traditional interpretation is doubtful, See Prof. Oldenberg, Vedic Hymns, Part Il. p.14 Mess of meal: a sort of gruel or porridge. lage: by oppression. The wild: by cruelty to wild animals. In company : by contemptuous behaviour. Corporeal sense: by abuse of the tongue or other unruly member.
48 Taken from R. V. I. 173.12, Spoken by the Saorificer, H pereormed by the Sacrificer and his wife. Who loudly roar: the terrible end. With Gods may I wash out the sin that I have sinned against the Gods, with meu the sin against mankind. Preserve me safo from injury, O God, from him who loudly roars.
49 Full, fly away, O spoon, and filled completely fly thou back to us. O Satakratu, let us twain barter, like goods, our food and strength.
50 Give me, I give thee gifts: bestow on me, and I bestow on thee. To me present thy merchandize, and I to thee will give my wares,
51 Well have they eaten and regaled: the friends have risen and passed away. The sages, luminous in themselves, have praised thee with their latest hymn. Now, Indra, yoke thy two Bay Steeds.
52 Thee will we reverence, thee, O Lord of Bounty, who art fair to see, Thus praised, according to our wish come now with richly- laden car. Now, Indra, yoke thy two Bay Steeds.
53 We call the spirit hither with a hero-celebrating strain, Yea, with the Fathers’ holy hymns.
54 The spirit comes to us again for wisdom, energy, and life, That we may long behold the Sun.
55 O Fathers, may the Heavenly Folk give us the spirit once again, ‘That we may be with those who live.
56 O Soma, with the spirit still within us, blest with progeny, May we be busied in thy law.
57 O Rudra, this is thine allotted portion. With Ambika thy sister kindly take it. This, Rudra, is thy share, the rat thy victim.
58 We have contented Rudra, yea, put off Tryambaka the God, That he may make us wealthier, may make us yet more prosperous, may make us vigorous to act.
59 Thou art a healing medicine, a balm for cow and horse and man, & happiness to ram and ewe.
60 Tryambaka we worship, sweet augmenter of prosperity. As from its stem a cucumber, may I be freed from bouds of death, not reft of immortality, We worship him, Tryambaka, the husband-finder, sweet to smell. As from its stem a cucumber, hence and not thence may I be loosed.
61 This, Rudra, is thy food: with this depart beyond the Majavius. With bow unstrung, with mufled staff, clothed in a garment made of skin, gracions, not harming us, depart.
62 May Jumadagni’s triple life, the triple life of Kasyapa, The triple life of Deities—may that same triple life be ours.
