2 Him let the Hotar worship, him Tananapa&t with ready aids;
the conqueror never overcome, Indra, the God who finds heaven’s light on paths most rich in pleasant sweets, with Nurdgamsa all aglow. Let him enjoy, etc., as in verse 1,
3 With viands let the Hotar worship Indra immortal, praised, receiver of oblations. The God, the equal of the Gods in vigour, the thander- wielder, breaker-down of castles. Let bim eujoy, etc.
4 Let the Priest worship Indra, Bull who sitteth on sacred grass, doer of manly actions. . Let him be seated on the grass with Vasus and Rudras and Adityas for compauions, Let him enjoy, etc.
5 Let the Priest sacrifice. The Doors have strengthened In- dra, his force and conquering might and vigour. At this our worship let the Doors be opened, easy to pass, the strengtheners of Order: wide let them open out for bounteous Indra, Let them enjoy, ete.
6 Let the Priest sacrifice to Night and Morning, the teeming Cows of Indra, Mighty Mothers. Indra their calf with lustre have they strengthened, even as two mothers of acalfincommon. Let them enjoy, ete.
7 Let the Friest worship both the heavenly Hotara, Frieuds, Leeches, healing Indra with oblation. The sayes, Gods preémineut for wisdom bestow on Indra his surpassing power. Let them enjoy, eto.
8 Let the Priest offer sacrifice to the three Goddesses and balm. Let the three triple active Ones, let Idi and Sarasvati and Bharat the mighty Dames, Consorts of Indra, who receive our sacrificial offerings, enjoy the butter, etc.
9 Let the Priest worship Tvashtar radiant Indra, Physician good at sacrifice, graced with butter, Multiform and prolific, rich and bounteous. Let Tvashtar, giving wondrous powers to Indra, enjoy, etc.
10 Let the Priest worship him, the Forest-Sovran, the Immola- tor, Lord of Hundred Powers, the lover of the prayer, the friend of Indra. Balming with mead, may he on easy pathways sweeten our sacrifice with savoury butter. Let him enjoy, etc,
11 Let the Priest offer sacrifice to Indra: with Hail! to Gods of butter; with Hail! to Gods of marrow; with Hail! to Gods of drops; with Hail! to Gods of offerings puid with Svaha ; with Hail! to Gods of sacrificial hymns, All-hail! May butter-drinking Gods and Indra rejoicing taste the butter. Hotar, worship.
12 Vigorous, strewn by Gods upon the altar the right Gods’ sacred Grass hath strengthened Indra. Cut in the day, cherished by night it hath surpassed those who have sacrificial Grass with wealth. For gain of riches let him taste. Pay sacrifice.
13 Firm, elosely joined, the Doors divine have strengthened Indra in the rite. Pressed by a calf or tender boy may they drive off the courser as he tosses up the sand. For gain of wealth let them enjoy. Pay sacrifice.
14 Morning and Night. the Goddesses, have called on Indra as the rite advanced. May they well-pleased and ordered well make the Celestial Tribes come forth, For gain of wealth let them enjoy. Pay sacrifice.
15 Two Goddesses, wealth-givers, kind, have heightened radiant Indra’s strength. One drives away hatreds and sins ; the other shall bring the Sacrificer boons and treasure. Instructed, let them both enjoy, for gain of wealth. Pay sacrifice,
16 Bringers of strengthening sacrifice, the Goddesses, the teem- ing Cows, have prospered Indra with their milk. Let one bring food and energy, the other feast and banqueting, Bringers of strengthening sacrifice, allotting the several por- tions they have put together old energy with new and new with olden, strengthening boons and treasures for the Sacrificer. Instructed, let them, etc., as in verse 15.
17 The two Celestial Hotars, Gods, have heightened radiant Indra’s might. Freed from slain sinners these have brought the Sacrificer wealth and boons. Instructed, let them, ete.
18 Goddesses three, three Goddesses have heightened their Lord Indra’s strength. One, Bharati, hath touched the sky, Sarasvatt the sacrifics with Rudras, and, enriched with wealth, Id& the home- steads of the folk. For gain of wealth let them enjoy. Pay sacrifice.
19 The radiant Indra, Praise of Men, thrice-shielding, borne on three car-seats, hath heightened radiant Indra’s strength. Set on a hundred white-backed cows, yea, on a thousand forth be goes. Mitra and Varuna alone deserve to be his Hotar-Priests, Brihaspati his Chanter, and the Asvins bis Adbvaryavas. For gain of wealth let him enjoy. Pay sacrifice.
20 Vunaspati, a God with Gods, with golden leaves, sweet boughs, fair fruit, hath heightened radiant Indra’s strength Sky with his summit hath he touched, and firmament, and stablished earth. For gain of wealth let him enjoy. Pay sacrifice.
21 The grassy robe of water-plants, divine, hath heightened Indra’s strength. This, the fair seat where Indra sits, hath topped all other sacred grass, For gain of wealth let it enjoy. Pay sacrifice.
22 Agni, Fair-offering-maker, bright, hath heightened radiant ‘Indra’s strength. Today may Svishtakrit, Fair-offering-maker, paying good sacrifice, for us perform it, For gain of wealth let him enjoy. Pay sacrifice.
23 To-day the Sacrificer hath elected—dressing messes of cooked food and a rice-cake, binding a goat for Indra—Agni as his Hotar. To-day divine Vanaspati hath with a goat served Indra well. He hath eaten from the fat, he hath accepted the cooked food, he hath waxed strong with the rice-cake. Thee, to-day, O Rishi, etc., as iu XXI. 61.
24 Let the Priest worship Agni, Indra, kindled, splendidly kindled, excellent strength-giver, Lending him mighty power, Gayatri metre, a cow aged eighteen months, and vital vigour, Let him enjoy the butter. Hotar, worship.
25 Let the Priest serve with sacrifice him who breaks forth, Taudnapat, the germ which Aditi conceived, ‘pure Indra who bestoweth strength, Bringing him mighty power, the Ushnih metre, an ox of two years old, and vital vigour. Let him enjoy, eto,
26 Let the Priest sacrifice to Soma, Indra, peorable, adored, best Vritra-slayer, strength-giver, might, to be adored with viands, Bringing him mighty power, Anushtup metre, a cow of thirty months, and vital vigour. Let him enjoy, eto.
27 Let the Priest worship Indra, strength-bestower, immortal, with fair grass, allied with Pashan, seated on sacred grass, dear, everlasting, Bringing him mighty power, Brihati metre, a steer of three years’ age and vital vigour. Let him enjoy, etc.
28 Let the Priest worship the wide-opening Portals, easy to pass, divine, Law-strengthening, golden, Indra, the Brah- man t, the strength-bestower, Bringing him mighty power, the Pankti metre, s bullock four years old, and vital vigour. Let them enjoy the butter. Hotar, worship.
29 Let the Priest worship lofty Night and Morning, well- decked, of varied hue, lovely to look on, Indra the Uni- versal, strength-bestower, Bringing him mighty power, the Trishtup metre, a bullock four years old, and vital vigour. Let them enjoy the butter. Hotar, worship.
30 Let the Priest worship both celestial Hotars, the Gods’ best. glory, sages famed for wisdom, the two companions, Indra strength-bestower, Bringing him mighty power, Jagati metre, an ox that draws the wain, and vital vigour. Let them enjoy the butter. Hotar, worship,
31 Let the Priest sacrifice to three well-decorated Goddesses, gold-decked, great, lofty, Bhératis, Indra their Lord who giveth strength, Bringing him mighty power, Viraj the metre, and a cow in milk, Let him enjoy the butter. Hotar, worship. $2 Let the Priest worship Tvashtar the prolific, strengthener of growth, maintaining varied growth and form, Iudra who gfveth vital force, Bringing him Dvipad metre, mighty power, and an ox full- grown. Let him enjoy the butter. Hotar, sacrifice.
33 Let the Priest serve with sacrifice the Forest Lord Vanaspati, the Immolator, hundred-powered, praise-worthy, golden- leafed, who wears the girdle, loved, the gracious Lord, Indra who gives the strength of life, Giving him Kakup metre, mighty power, a barren, a calf- slipping cow, and vital vigour. Let him enjoy the butter. Hotar, sacrifice.
34 Let the Priest offer worship to the Svahakriti Goddesses, to ‘Agni Household Lord apart, to Varuna the Leech and Sage, might, Indra who bestoweth strength, Bringing him Atichhandas metre, great and mighty power, . a.strong bull, in his prime, and vital vigour. Let them enjoy the butter, Hotar, sacrifice.
81 Bhdvatts: that is, Bhiratt and her two constant companions, Sares- vatt and Ida.
83 The girdle: the cord with which the victim is attached. 7 Introductory Oblati:as deified. " 7 VERSE 43.) W4ITR YA4JURVEDA, 245 giver, Laying in Indra wondrous power and sight and strength by Gayatri. For gain of wealth let him enjoy the butter. Offer sacrifice,
36 The Doors divine have magnified bright Indra, who bestoweth strength, With Ushnih laying mighty power in Indra, vital breath and force. For gain of wealth let them enjoy the butter. Offer sacrifice.
37 Morning and Night, divine Ones, have strengthened bright Indra, strength-giver, the Goddesses advanced the God, With the Aaushtup laying power in Indra, strength and vital force. For gain of wealth let them enjoy. Pay sacrifice.
38 Kind, bounteous, and divine, they have strengthened bright Indra, force-giver, the Goddesses advanced the God, Laying in Indra power and force aud hearing with the Brihati. For gain of wealth let them enjoy. Pay sacrifice.
39 Bringers of strengthening sacrifice, the Goddesses, two teem- ing cows, have heightened Indra’s power with milk, Laying bright power in Indra with Pankti, and vital energy. For gain of wealth let them enjoy. Pay sacrifice.
40 The Gods, two heavenly Hotars, have strengthened bright Indra, force-giver, those Gods have magnified the God, With Trishtup giving Indra power, impetuous might, and vital strength. For gain of wealth let them enjoy. Pay sacrifice.
41 Goddesses three, three Goddesses have heightened their Lord Indra’s streagth, his who bestoweth vital force, - Laying in Indra power and might and vital strength with Jagati. For gain of wealth let them enjoy. Pay sacrifice.
42 The God, the Praise of all men, hath strengthened bright Indra force-giver, the God bath magnified the God, Laying in Indra with Virdj beauty and power and vital foree, For gain of wealth let him enjoy. Pay sacrifice.
43 The God the Forest Sovran hath strengthened bright Indra, force-giver, the God hath magnified the God, With Dvipad storing Indra with fortune and power and vital strength. For gain of wealth let him enjoy. Pay sacrifice,
44 The Grass divine of water-plants hath helped bright Indra force-giver, the God hath magnified the God, Laying in Indra mighty power with Kakup, fame and vital strength, For gain of wealth let it enjoy. Pay sacrifice,
45 Agni, the God who makes fair rites, hath strengthened Indra force-giver, the God hath magnified the God, Laying with Atichhandas power in Indra, sway, and vital strength. For gain of wealth let him enjoy. Pay sacrifice.
