2 Kindle thee, Agni, wake this man to knowledge: rise up
erect for great and happy fortune. Agni, be those uninjured who adore thee, thy priests be glorious and none beside them !
3 The Brahmans present here elect thee, Agni: be thou pro- pitious in our sanctuary. Slayer of rivals, Agni, quell our foemen: watch in thy house with care that never ceases.
4 Even here do thou, 0 Agni, stablish wealth ; let not oppres- sors injure thee by thiuking of thee first. Light be thy task of ruling, Agni, with thy power : may he who worships thee wax strong, invincible.
5 Kind to the people, grasp thy power, O Agni: contend thou with the Friend by way of friendship. Placed, Agui, in the eentre of our kinsmen, flash forth to be invoked by Kings around thee.
6 Past those who slay, past enemies, past thoughtless men, past those who hate,— Yea, Agni, drive away all woe and trouble: vouchsafe us opulence with meu about us.
7 Holder of sway, shine here refulgent, Agni! invincible, unconquered Jatavedas. Light all the regions, chasing human terrors: with happy helps guard us to-day for increase.
16 Upon this grass three Goddesses be seated, Ida, Sarasvati, Bharati the Mighty glorified with song.
20 This our productive wondrous flow may Tvashtar pour down on this man’s kin, and wealth and heroes.
21 Vanaspati, presenting of thyself, send God-ward ! Let Agni, Tinmolator, season our oblation.
23 Pay sacrifice to Indra, Jatuvedas Ayni! with Hail! All Gods accept the gift we offer !
23 Wise, bright, arranger of bis teams, he seeketh men with rich fond whose treasures are abundant. They have stood firm of one accord with Vayu: yea, the men wrought all noble operations.
24 The God whom both these worlds brought forth for riches, whom heavenly Dhishand for our wealth appointeth— His team of harnessed horses waits on Vayu aud, foremost, on the radiant trexsure-holder.
26 What time the mighty waters came containing the universal germ, producing Agui, Thence sprung the Gods’ one spirit into being. What God shall we adore with our oblation ?
26 Who in his might surveyed the floods enclosing productive force and generating Worship, He who is God mid Gods, and none beside him—What God shall we adore with our oblation 3
97 The teams wherewith thou seckest him who offers, within his house, O Vayu, to direct him, Therewith send wealtb to us with full enjoyment, a hero son and gifts of kine and horses,
28 With thy yoked teams in hundreds and in thousands come to our sacrifice and solemn worshi more, ye Gods, with blessings.
29 Drawn by thy team, O Vayu, come; to thee is offered this, the pure. Thou visitest the presser’s house.
30 Vayu, the bright is offered thee, best of the meath at holy rites. Come thou to drink the Soma juice, God longed-for, on thy team-drawn car.
31 Lover of worship, leader, come Vayu with thought, to sacrifice, Propitious with propitious teams! With all the thousand chariots that are thine, O Vayu, come to us, Team-drawn, to drink the Soma juice.
33 Come thou with one, and ten, O Self-Existent! with two unto the sactifice, and twenty. Three are the teams and thirty which oonvey thee. O Vayu, in this place unyoke thy coursers.
34 Wonderful Vayu, Lord of ‘Truth, thou who art Tvashtar's Son in-law, Thy saving suocour we elect.
85 Like kine unmilked we call aloud, Hero, to thee and sing thy praise, . Looker on heavenly light, Lord of this moving world, Lord, Indra! of what movetb not.
36 None other like to thee, of earth or of the heavens, hath’ been or ever will be born. Desiring horses, Indra, Bounteous Lord! and kine, as mei of might we cull on thee.
37 That we may win us wealth and power, we poets call on only thee, In war men call on thee, Indra! the hero's Lord, in the steed’s race-course call on thee.
38 As such, O Wonderful, whose hand holds thander, praised as mighty, Caster of the Stone ! eo &
29 Taken from R. V. II, 41.2. The pure: Soma juice.
30 Taken from R. V. IV, 47. 1.
32 R. VL 41. 1.
34 R. V. VILL 26, 21, Toashtar's Son-in-law : the commentators give n0 satisfactory explanation. Sarayyu (whois perhaps Ushas, Dawn), Tvashtars daughter, was wedded to Vivasvan who cannot be identified with Vaya See Hillebrandt, Vedische Mythologie, I. p. 521. Moving world: all animated beings, Pour on us boldly, Indra, kine and chariot-steeds ever to be the conqueror’s strength. What succour will he bring to us, wonderful, ever-prospering Friend? With what most mighty company ?
40 What genuine and most liberal draught will spirit thee with juice to burst Open e’en strongly-guarded wealth? Do thou who art protector of us thy friends who praise thee With hundred aids approach us.
42 Sing to your Agni with each song, at every sacrifice, for strength. Come, let us praise the Wise and Everlasting God even as a well-belovéd Friend.
