2 Wave of the male art thou, giver of kingship. Do thou—
All-bail !—bestow on me the kingdom. Wave of the male art thou, giver of kingship. Do thou on So-and-So bestow the kingdom. Thou hast a host of males, giver of kingship. Do thoa— All-hail !—bestow on me the kingdom. A host of males hast thou, giver of kingship. Do thou on So-aud-3o bestow the kingdom.
3 Swift at your work are-ye, givers of kingship. Do ye—All- hail !—bestow on me the kingdom. Swift at your work are ye, givers of kingship. Do ye on So-and-So bestow the kingdom. Endowed with strength are ye, givers of kingship, etc. O’erflowing floods are ye, ete. The Waters’ Lord art thou, giver of kingship. Do thou, etc. ‘The Waters’ Child art thou, etc.
4 With sun-bright skins are ye, givers, eto. Brilliant as Suns are ye, etc. Bringers of joy are ye, etc. Dwellers in cloud are ye, etc. Desirable are ye, etc. - Most powerful are ye, etc. Endowed with might are ye, etc. Man-nourishing are ye, etc. All-nourishing are ye, ete. Self-ruling Waters are ye, giving kingship. On So-and-So do ye bestow the kingdom. Together with the sweet let sweet ones mingle, obtaining for the Kshatriya mighty power. Rest in your place inviolate and potent, bestowing on the Kehatriya mighty power.
5 pollens of Soma art thou: may my brilliance grow like thine. To Agni Hail! To Soma Hail! To Savitar Hail! To Sara- svati Hail! To Pishan Hail! To Brihaspati Hail! To Indra Hail! To the Noise Hail! To Fame Hail! To Amga Hail! ‘To Bhaga Hail! To Aryamaa Hail!
6 Ye are two strainers, Varuna’s own possession. I make you pure at Savitar’s impulsion, with flawless strainer, with the beams of Sirya. Thou, friend of speech, heat-born, art undefeated. Soma’s share art thou. Hail, ye king-producers ! shines. Brilliant: rain-water that falls in sunshine. Bringers of joy: water from a lake, Dusilere in elowd: ‘foldcdveler’ E ing 3 mare from a irable: or, perhape, ol it : the water of dew: fost power- ful: he takes flowing honey. Endowed with might : fluida of an unborn calf, ‘Man nourishing : Al-nourishing: butter. Self-raling: sun motes which, after taking seventeen kinds of water, he takes and mingles with them, ‘Together : he mixes them all ina vessel of Udumbara wood. The Kehatriya: the prinoe who is being consecrated King. Maitravarupa’s dhishyyd or fire-hearth, and recites the formulas. Of Soma: because Indra booeme a figer attr he hed drank Some, says the Commen, tator. The tiger, in the Atharva-veds, is the king of beaste dnd the type of heroic strength and courage. Soe A. V. IV. 8, 4, 7., The Noite: of his pro- clamation as king. dmga. the name of one of the Adityas. Friend of speeoh: the mingled waters are addressed in the singular number. ‘Man, it ia ssid, has the power of speech eo long as there is water in hie vital aire or breathings. Heat-born: from fire smoke, from smoke cloud, from cloud water. Soma’s share: when the priesta moisten the plant with ‘water,
7 Sharers in joy are these majestic Waters, inviolate, indus. trious, investing, In these as homes hath Varuna made his dwelling, he, Child of Waters, in the best of mothers,
8 Thou art the inner caul of princely power. Thou art the outer caul of princely power. Of princely power thou art the womb, the navel. Thou art the Vritra-slaying arm of Indra, Mitra’s art thou, thou Varuna’s possession. With thee to aid may this man slaughter Vritra. Cleaver art thou; thou Render ; thou art Shaker. Protect him ye in front, protect him rearwards ; protect him side- . Wards ; from all quarters guard him,
9 Visible, O ye men. Informed is Agni, Master of the House- hold. Informed is Indra of exalted glory. Informed are Mitra-Varuna, Law-Maintainers. Informed is Pdshan, Lord of all Possessions. Informed are Heaven and Earth, the All-propitious. Informed is Aditi who gives wide shelter. 10. Appeased by sacrifice are biting creatures, Ascend the East. May Gfyatri protect thee, the psalm Rathantara, the triple praise-song, the season Spring, and the rich trea- sure, Priesthood.
11 “Ascend the South. Be thy protectors ‘Irishtup, the Bribat Saman, the fifteenfold praise-song, the season Summer, and the treasure Kingship.
12 Ascend the West. May Jagati protect thee, the psalm Vai- ripa, the seventeenfold praise-song, the Raintime, and that store of wealth, the People.
13 Ascend the North. Thy guardians be Anushtup, Vairdja psalm, the twenty-onefold praiseaong, the season Autumn, that rich treasure Fruitage.
14 Ascend the Zenith. Pankti be thy keeper, Sikvara, Raivata the pair of Simans, Praise-songs the thirty-threefold and thrice-ninefold, both seasons, Winter, Dews, thut treasure lustre. The head of Namuchi hath been cast from me.
15 Brilliance of Soma art thou, may my brillianee grow like thine. Save me from death. Vigour art thou, victory, everlasting life.
16 With golden bodies, at the flush of morning, ye rise on high, two Sovran Lords, and Sfarya. Ascend your car, O Varuna and Mitra: thence view. infinity and limitation. Thou art Mitra, thou art Varuna,
17 Thee with the strength of Soma, Agni’s lustre, with Sarya’s splendour, Indre’s might I sprinkle. Be lord of princes : safe past arrows guard him.
18 =1X. 40.
19 Forth from the summit of the bull, the mountain, pouring: spontaneously, the ships keep moving. They, lifted up, have turned them back and downward, stilt flowing onward, after Ahibudhnya. Thou art the stepping-forth of Visbnu: thou art Vishno’s outstep ; Visbnu’s step art thou.
20 Prajapati, thou only comprehendest all these created forme, and none beside thee. 1 Give us our heart's desire when wo invoke thee. So-and-So’s father is this man. Sire of this man is So-and-So. May we—All-hail !—be lords of rich possessions. What active highest name thou hast, O Rudra, therein thou art an offering, art an offering at home. All-hail !
21 Indra’s bolt art thou. I by the direction of Mitra-Varuns, Directors, yoke thee. I, the uninjured Arjuna, mount thee for firmness, thee for food. By quickening of the Maruts be thou vietor. May we obtain by mind: with power united.
22 Let us not, Indra, conqueror of the mighty, unfit through Jack of prayer fail to obtain thee. Ascend the car which thou whose hand bears thunder controllest, and the reins with noble borses. a friendly Rajanya, and a Vaisya, man of the people or third class, ftom the three other vessels of consecrating water, made respectively of Udumbara, Banyan or Ficus Indica, and Agvattha (Ficus Religie) wood. Guard kim: the King, preéminent over all, from whose head the of conseerating water flow. Ships: streams of water. Lifted up: from the earth by the Sun, Adibudhnya: a mysterious atmospheric deity, regent ef the depths of the firmament ; the Dragon of the Deep. See The Hymne of the Rig- veda, Index. The ig Jorth: the Saerifcer is made to take thtee steps on the tiger-skin in imitation of Vishnu’s three strides, as the Sum, over earth and through firmament and heaven, in the fire at the door of the sacrificial hall (the Garhapatya fire) and recites the text, taken, with additions, from R. V, X. 121.10. Soand-So's......80- and-8o:' the names of son and father are to be substituted. Redra - addressed as Lord of Cattle, the chief wealth of the earlier Hindus. Active - powerful to injure: Mahtdhara. how: he addresses the oblation of the residue of the sacrificial material. . es the four horses at the right corner of the altar. Arjuna: a name of \dra, whom the Sacrificer, as King, represents. Be thou victor: he addresses the off yoke horse, By mind. he stops the chariot in the midst of the a3- eembled cows. By power: he touches a cow with the end of the bow,
22 He gives the owner of the cows, his brother, as many as, or mors than, he fae taken by the eymbolical aot of touchiog one in verve 21, and.
23 All hail to Agni, Master of the Household! All-bail to Soma, Sovran of the Forest ! All-hail to the great vigour of the Maruts! All-hail to the effectual might of Indra ! njure me not, O Mother Earth, and may I never injure thee.
24 The Hamsa throned in light, the Vasu in mid-air, the Priest beside the altar, Guest within the house, Dwelling in noblest place, mid men, in trath, in sky, born of flood, kine, truth, mountain, he is mighty Law.
25 So great art thou: life art thou; give me life. Mate art thou: thou art splendour ; give me splendour. Strength art thou: give me strength, I draw you down- ward, two arms of Indra mighty in achievement.
26 Fair art thou, good to sit on, womb of kingship. Sit on the fair one, sit on that which offers a pleasant seat : ait in the womb of kingship.
27 Varuna, Law’s maintainer, hath sat down among his people, he Most wise, for universal sway,
28 Supreme Lord art thou. May these five regions of thine be prosperous, Brahman! Thou art Brahman, Savitar art thou, faithful in impulsion, Varuna art thou, he whose power is real. Indra art thou, whose strength is of the people. Rudra art thou, the very kind and gracious.
33 Ye Asvins, Lords of Splendour, drank full draughts of grateful Soma juice, And aided Indra in his deeds with Namuchi of Asura birth.
