Tuart which, divine, mounts far when man is waking, that which returns to him when he is sleeping, The lights’ one light that goeth to a distance, may that, my mind, be moved by right intention.
sacrifice, perform their duties, The peerless spirit stored in living creatures, may that, my mind, be moved by right intention.
3 That which is wisdom, intellect, and firmness, immortal light which creatures have within them, That without which men do no single action, may that, my mind, be moved by right intention.
4 Whereby, immortal, all is comprehended, the world which is, and what shall be hereafter, . Whereby spreads sacrifice with seven Hutars, may that, my mind, be moved by right intention.
5 Wherein the Richas, Samans, Yajur-verses, like spokes with- in a car’s nave, are included, And all the thought of creatures is inwoven, may that, my mind, be moved by right intention.
6 Controlling men, as, with the reins that guide them, a skil- ful charioteer drives fleet-foot horses, Which dwells within the heart, agile, most rapid, may that, my mind, be moved by right intention.
7 Now will I glorify great strength’s upholder, Food, By whose invigorating might Trita rent Vritra limb from limb. ‘The first six verses of this supplementary Book constitute a hymn re garded as au Upanishad and called the ivasakalpa, Right-intentioned, from the concluding words in each stanza. The rest is compilation of miscellaneous texts which may be used iu the performance of the General Sacrifice. kalpam. The lights! one light : the illuminator of all the perceptive senses, Varuna, Achchhavaka, Grivastut and others. (in the shape of Soma), Trita: (see I. 23, note) a mysterious ancient deity frequently mentioned in the Rigved Vayu, and the Maruts. His home i he is called Aptya, the Watery, that is, eprung from, or dwelling in, the ses of cloud and vapour. By Sayana he is Hentifed sometimes with Vayu, sometimes with Indra as the pervader of the three worlds and rometiines with Agni stationed in the three fire-receptacles, Mabfdhara identifies him, without explanation, with Indra who is generally regarded as the slayer of Vritra, See Macdonell, Vedic Mythology, pp. 67—69, & Do thou, iu truth, Anumati, assent and grant us happiness, Urge us to strength, and energy : prolong the days we have to live.
9 Anumati this day approve our sacrifice among the Gods! Oblation-bearing Agui be, and thou, bliss to the worshipper!
10 O broad-tressed Sinivali, thou who art the sister of the Gods, Accept the offered sacrifice, and, Goddess, grant us progeny.
11 Five rivers flowing on their way speed onward to Sarasvati, But then became Sarasvati a fivefold river in the land.
12 O Agni, thou the earliest Angiras, the Seer, hast, God thy- self, become the Gods’ auspicious Friend. After thy holy ordinance the Maruts, sage, active through wisdom, with their glittering spears, were bora.
13 Worthy to be revered, O Agni, God, preserve our wealthy patrons with thy succours, and ourselves. Guard art thou of our seed and progeny and cows, incessantly protecting in thy holy law.
14 Lay this with care on her who lies extended: atraight, when impregned, hath she brought forth the Hero. With his bright pillar—radignt is his lustre—in our absilled task is born the Son of Ida.
15 In Ida's place, the centre of the earth, will we deposit thee, That, Agui Jatavedas, thou mayst bear our offeriugs to the Gods.
16 Like Angiras a gladdening laud we ponder to him who loveth song, exceeding mighty. Let us sing glory to the far-famed Hero who must be praised with fair hymns by the singer.
17 Unto the Great One bring great adoration, a chant of praise to him the very potent, Through whom our sires, Angirases, singing praises, and knowing well the places, found the cattle.
18 The friends who offer Soma long to find thee: they pour forth Soma and present their vinnds. They bear, unmoved, the cursing of the people, for all our wisdom comes from thee, O Indra.
19 Not far for thee are mid-air’s loftiest regions: start hither, Lord of Bays, with both Bay Horses. Pressed for the Firm and Strong are these libations. The pressing-stones are set, the fire is kindled.
20 Invincible in fight, saviour in battles, guard of our camp, winner of light and water, Boro amid hymns, well-housed, exceeding famous, victor, in thee may we rejoice, O Soma.
21 To him who worships Soma gives a milch-cow, @ fleet ateed, and a man of active knowledge, Skilled in home duties, competeut in council, meet for the court, the glory of his father.
22 These herbs, these milch-kine, and these running waters, all these, O Soma, thou hast generated. The sp:cious firmament hast thou expanded, and with the light thou hast dispelled the darkness.
23 Do thou, God Soma, with thy God-like spirit, victorious, win for us a share of riches. Let none prevent thee: thou art Lord of valour. Provide for these and those in fight for cattle.
24 The earth’s eight points his brightness hath illumined, three desert regions, and the Seven Rivers. God Savitar the gold-eyed hath come hither, giving choice treasures to the man who worships. between the earth and heaven, Drives away sickness, bids the Sun approach us, aud spreads the bright sky through the darksome region. ‘6 May he, gold-handed Asura, kind leader, come hitherward to us with help and favour. Driving off Rakshasas and Yatudb&nas, the God is present, praised in hymns at evening. lished in the air’s mid-region. O God, come by those paths so fair to travel : preserve thou us from harm this day and bless us. ‘8 Drink our libatious, Agvins twain, grant us protection, both of you, With aids which none may interrupt. ye mighty Wonder-workers, Tu luckless_ game 1 call ou you for succour: strengthen us alo on the field of battle.
40 With undiminished blessings, O ye Agvins, through daysand nights on every side protect us. This prayer of ours may Varuna grant, and Mitra, and Aditi and Sindbu, Earth and Heaven,
41 Throughout the dusky firmament, etc., as in XXXIII. 43. $2 Night! the terrestrial realm hath been filled with the Father’s power and might. Thon spreadest thee on high unto the seats of heaven : terri- fic darkness cometh nigh. Bring offspring for ourselves with food to feed us, May we find strengthening food in full abundance.
49 They who were versed in rit d metre, in hymns and rules, were the Seven godlike Rishis. Viewing the path of those of old, the sages have taken up the reins like chariot-drivers,
50 Bestowing splendour, length of life, increase of wealth, and conquering power, This brightly shining gold shall be attached to me for victory.
51 This gold no demons injure, no Pigachas ; for this is might of Gods, their primal offspring. Whoever wears the gold of Duksha’s children lives a long life among the Gods, lives a long life among mankiud,
52 This ornament of gold which Daksha’s children bound, with benevolent thoughts, ou Satanika, I bind on me for life through bondred autumns, that I may live till ripe old age o'ertakes me.
53 Let Abibudhnya also hear our calling, and Aja-Ekapid and Earth and Ocean, All Gods Law-strengtheners, invoked and lauded, and Texts recited by the sages, help us!
54 These hymns that drop down fatness, with the ladle I ever offer to the Kings Adityas. May Mitra, Aryaman, and Bhaga hear us, the mighty Varuna, Daksha, and Am.a.
55 Seven Rishis are established in the body: seven guard it evermore with care unceasing. Seven waters seck the world of him who lies asleep: two sleepless Gods are feast-fellows of him who wakes.
56 O Brahmanaspati, arise. God-fearing men, we pray to thee. May they who give goud gifta, the Maruts, come to us. Indra, be thou most swift with them.
57 Now Brahmanaspati speaks forth aloud the solemn hywn of praise, Wherein Indra and Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman, the Gods have made their dwelling-place.
