Harnessine, first of all, the mind, Savitar having stretched the thought With reverent look upon the light of Agni bore them up from earth,
With might to win the heavenly.
3 Savitar, having harnessed Gods who go to light and heaven- ly thought, Who will create the lofty light—Savitar urge them on their way!
4 The priests of him the lofty priest well skilled in hymns, harness their spirit, yea, harness their holy thoughts. He only, skilled in rules, assigns their priestly tasks. Yea, lofty is the praise of Savitar the God.
5 1 yoke with prayer your ancient inspiration: may the laud rise as on the prince’s pathway. All Sons of the Immortal One shall hear it, who have resorted to celestial dwellings.
6 Even he, the God whose going forth and majesty the other Deities have followed with their might, He who hath measured the celestial regions out by his great, power, he is the Courser Savitur.
7 Our sacrifice, God Savitar! speed forward : spéed to his share the sactifice’s patton. May the celestial Gandharva, cleanser of thought and will, make clean our thoughts and wishes, The Lord of Speech sweeten the words we ttter!
8 God Savitar, speed this God-loved sacrifice of ours, friend- finding, ever-conquering, winning wealth and heaven. Speed praise-sony with the sacred verse, Rathantara with Gayatra, Brihat that rung in Gayatra. All-hail !
9 By impulse of God Savitar I take thee, with arms of Agvins, with the hands of Pashan, in Angiras’ manner, with Gayatri metre. From the earth’s seat bring thou Purishya Agni, as Angiras was wont, with Trishtup metre,
10 Spade art thou; woman art thou. Ours be power with thee to dig out Agni in his dwelling, as Angiras was wont,with Jagatt metre.
11 Savitar, bearing in his hand the gold spade which he took therewith, Lookiug with reverence on the light of Agni, raised it from the earth, With the Anushtup metre and as Angiras was wont to do.
12 Run hither, urged to speed, O Horse, along the most extend- ed space. thantara: see X.10, Brihat: see VIL. 22; X. 11, earth and clay for the construction of the Altar. Jn Angiras’ manner: as Angiras, one of the institutors of Agni’s worship, and the priestly members of his family did aforetime. Purtshya: an epithet of Agni identified with the Altar, abiding in the loose earth or rubble used a8 mortar to fill the spaces between the bricks and to bind them together. Mahtdhara gives another meaning also: good to purtshas, that is, cattle. See III. 40. to Mabtdhara, ndrina+arih, may mean, not having an enemy. See Ve 22, note. he-goat, that have been posted looking eastward, First the horse is ad- creeccaa representing the Sun in heaven, Vayu in midair, and Agai ob earth, Thy loftiest birthplace is in heaven, thy navel is in air’s mid-realm, the womb that bare thee is on earth.
13 Upon this course, O lords of wealth, hatness, ye twain, the Ass who bears Agni, and kindly favours us.
14 In every need, in every race we call, as friends, to succour us, Indra, the mightiest of all.
15 Come. speeding on and trampling imprecations, come glad- dening to the chieftainship of Rudra. Speed through the wide air thou whose paths are pleasant, with PGshan for thy mate, providing safety.
16 From the Farth’s eeat, like Angiras, bring thou Purishya Agni forth. After the wont of Angiras we to Purtshya Agni go. Agni Purishya we will bear after the wout of Angiras.
17 Agni hath looked along the van of Mornings, looked on the days, the earliest Jatavedas, And many a time along the beams of Sirya: along the hea- ven and earth hast thou extended.
18 The Courser, started on his way, shakes from him all hosti- lites, He longs to look with reverent eye on Agniin the mighty seat. Aresses the horee. Imprecations : ill-wishes, or slanderous words of the Secrificer’s enemies. Rudra; as Pagupati, Lord of Beasts. Speed: here he addresses the ass, the steed of the Agvins. Pdshan: here said to mean Earth. three fires having been lighted, the Sacrffcer, the Brahman, and the Adh- varyu go to the lump of clay, representing Agai Purishya, which has been prepared for mating the Ukha or Fire-pan and placed in a square bole in the ground. Will we tear : with thi formula the Adhvaryu looks at the puppet or mock-man, the anaddh4purusha (one of no use to Gods, men, or Manes), to which a’ passive part in the ceremony is assigned. Prof. A. Hillebrandt, (Ritual-Litteratur, p. 165) suggesta that this doll or effigy may be a figure representing some enemy of the Sacrificer ; and Prof A. Weber that it isa sort of corpus vile, intended to Lear the blame of any accidental hitches and oversights in the performance of the ceremony. ntya fire, and through the cavity the Adhvaryu looks at the clay, reciting the text taken, with variations, from A. V. VII. 82. 5. evils of all kinds, Agni: represented by the lump of clay, On the mighty seat: manifested on the sacrificial ground,
19 © Courser, having come to earth, seek Agni with a longing wish. Tell us by trampling on the ground where we may dig him from the earth.
20 Heaven is thy back, the earth thy seat, the air thy soul, the sea thy womb. Looking around thee with thine eye trample the adversaries down.
21 Wealth-giver, Courser, from this place step forth to great felicity. May we enjoy Earth’s favour while we dig forth Agni from her lap.
22 Down hath he stepped, wealth-giver, racer, courser. Good and auspicious room on earth thou madest. Thence let us dig forth Agni, fair to look on, while to the loftiest vault we mount, to heaven.
23 I thoughtfully besprinkle thee with butter, thee dwelling near to all existing creatures. Broad, vast through vital power that moves traraversely, conspicuous, strong with all the fod that feeds thee.
24 I sprinkle him who moves in all directions : may he accept it with a friendly spirit, Agui with bridegroom's face and lovely colour may not be touched when all his form is fury.
25 Round the oblation hath he paced, Agni the wise, the Lord of Strength, Giving the offerer precious boons.
26 We set thee round us as a fort, victorious Agni, thee a Sage, Of hero lineage, day by day destroyer of our treacherous foes.
27 Thou, Agni, with the days, fain to shine hitherward, art brought to life from out the waters, from the stone, From out the forest trees and herbs that grow on ground, thou, Sovran Lord of men, art generated pure.
28 At Savitar’s, the Shining One’s, impulsion, with arms of Asvins and with hands of Pishan, As Angiras was wont to do, I dig thee forth from the seat of Earth, Agni Purishya. Thee, Agni, luminous and fair of aspect, resplendent with imperishable lustre, gracious to aying creatures, never harming, As Angiras was wont to do, we dig thee forth from the seat of Earth, Agni Purishya.
29 Thou art the Waters’ back, the womb of Agni, around the ocean as it swells aud surges. Waxing to greatness, resting on the lotus, spread thou in amplitude with heaven's own measure.
30 Yea are a shelter and a shield, uninjured both, and widely spread, Do ye, expansive, cover him: bear ye Purishya Agni up.
31 Cover him, finders of the light, united both with breast and Bearing between you Agui, the refulgent, everlasting One.
32 Thou art Purishya, thou support of all. Atharvan was the first, Agui, who rubbed thee into life. Agni, Atharvan brought thee forth by rubbing from the lotus, from The head of Vigva, of the Priest.
33 Thee too as Vyitra-slayer, thee breaker of forts, the Sage Dadhyach, Son of Atharvan, lighted up.
34 Pathya the Bull, too, kindled thee the Dasyus’ most destruc- tive foe, Wiuner of spoil in every fight.
35 Sit, Hotar, in the Hotar’s place, observant: lay down the sacrifice in the place of worship. Thou, dear to Gous, shalt serve them with oblation. Agui, give long life to the Sacrificer.
36 Accustomed to the-Hotar’s place, the Hotar hath seated him, bright, splendid, passing mighty, Whose foresight keeps the Law from violation, excellent, pure-tongued, bringing thousands, Agni.
37 Seat thee, for thou art mighty: shine, best entertainer of the Gods. Worthy of sacred food, praised Agni! loose the smoke, rud- dy and beautiful to see.
38 Pour heaveuly Waters honey-aweet here for our health, for progeny. Forth from the place whereon they fall let plants with good- ly berries spring.
39 May Vayu Matarigvan heal and comfort thy broken heart as there supine thou liest. Thou unto whom the breath of Gods gives motion, to Ka, yea, unto thee, O God, be Vashat !
40 He, nobly born with lustre, shield and refuge, hath sat down in light. O Agni, Rich in Splendour, robe thyself in many-hued attire.
41 Lord of fair sacritice, arise! With Godlike thought protect us well,
84 From R. V. VI. 16.15, Pdathya the Bull: or, the hero Pithya, pro- bably some celebrated Sacrificer. Prof, Max Miiller (Vedic Hymns, Part I. p- 158) takes vyishd here as a Proper Name, Vrishan Pathya. Dasyus: hostile aborigines, text is taken from R. V. IIL, 29. 8. Pour : O Spade, or O Heaven, or 0 Adhvaryu : Mabtdhara, the wounded earth. Mdtarigvan : in the R. V. generally a name or form of Agui, hero a designation of Wind ss breathing, moving, or growing in bis 6, note), that iby ion. With great light splendid to behold come, Agni, through sweet hymns of praise. Erect as strength-bestower when we call aloud, with un- guents and with priests on thee.
43 Thou, being born, art Child of Earth and Heaven, parted, fair Babe, among the plants, O Agni. The glooms of night thou, brilliant child, subduest, and art come forth, loud roaring, from the Mothers.
44 Steady be thou, and firm of limb. Steed, be a racer fleet of foot. Broad be thou, pleasant as a seat, bearing the store which Agni needs.
45 Be thou propitious, Angiras, to creatures of the human race. Set not on fire the heaven and earth, nor air’s mid-region, nor the trees,
46 Forth with loud neighing go the Steed, the Ass that shouteth as he runs. Bearing Purishya Agni on, let him uot perish ere his time, Male bearer of male Agni, Child of Waters, Offapring of the Sea, Agni, come hither to the feast.
47 The Law the Truth, the Law the Truth, As Angiras was wont to do, we bear Purishya Agni on. Ye Plants, with joyous welcome greet this Agni, auspicious One who cometh on to meet you. Removing all distresses and afflictions, here settle down ond banish evil purpose,
48 Welcome him joyfully, ye Plants, laden with bloom and goodly fruit. This seasonable Child of yours hath settled in his ancient seat.
49 Resplendent with thy wide-extending lustre dispeb the ter- rora of the fiends who hate us. May lofty Agni be my guide and shelter, ready to hear our call, the good Protector.
50 Ye, Waters, are beneficent, so help ye us to energy: Tbat we may look on great delight.
51 Give us a portion of the sap, the most propitious that ye have. Like mothers in their longing love,
52 To you we gladly come for him to whose abode ye lead ua. on: And, Waters, give us procreant strength.
53 Mitra, having commingled earth aud ground tegether with the light— For health to creatures mix I thee Omniscient and nobly bora,
54 a Eudes, having mixed the earth, set all aglow the lofty ight. Bright and perpetual their light verily shines among the Gods.
55 The lump of clay that hath been mixed by Vasus, Rudras, by the wise, May Sinivali with her hands soften and fit it for the work.
56 May Sinivali with fair braids, with beauteous crest, with lovely locks, May she, O mighty Aditi, bestow the Fire-pan im thy hands.
57 Aditi shape the Fire-pan with her power, ber arms, her in- tellect, And in her womb bear Agni as a mother, in her lap, her gon.
58 With Gayatri, like Angiras the Vasus form and fashion thee ! Stedfast art thou, thou art the Earth. Establish in me pro- geny, command of cattle, growth of wealth, kinsmen for mue the worshipper. With Trishtup may the Rudras, like Angiras, form and fashion thee. Stedfast art thou, thou art the Air. Establish in me, ete., as above. With Jagati, like Angiras, Adityas form and fashion thee ! Stedfast art thou, thou art the Sky. Establish in me, etc. Friends of all men, the All-Gods with Anushtup form thee Augiras-like. Stedfust art thou, thou art the Quarters, Establish in me, ete,
59 Thezone of Aditi art thou. Aditi seize thy hollow space. She, having made the great Fire-pan, a womb for Agni, formed of clay, Aditi, gave it to her Sons and, Let them bake it, were her words.
60 The Vasus make thee fragrant, as Angiras did, with Gayatri! ‘The Rudras make thee fragrant with the Trishtup, as did Angiras ! With Gayatri, like Angiras, may the Adityas perfume thee. Dear to all men, may the All-Gods with the Anushtup sweeten thee, as Angiras was wont to do. May Indra make thee odorous. May Varuna make thee odorous: May Vishnu make thee odorous.
61 Pit! Angiras-like may Aditi the Goddess, beloved by. all Gods, dig thee in Earth’s bosom. Pan ! Angiras-like may the Gods’ heavenly Consorts, dear to all Gods, in the Earth’s bosom place thee. Pan! Angiras-like may Dhishaniés, Divine Ones, dear to all Gods, in the Earth’s bosom light thee. Pan! Angiras-like may the divine Vardtrts, dear to all Gods, in the earth’s bosom heat thee, Pan! Angiras-like may the celestial Ladies, dear to all Gods, in the earth’s bosom bake thee. Angiras-like may the celestial Matrons, beloved by all the Gods, with unclipped pinions, within the lap of Earth, O Fire-pav, bake thee.
62 The gainful grace of Mitra, God, supporter of the race of man, Is glorious, of most wondrous fame.
63 With lovely arms, with lovely hands, with lovely fingers may the God Savitar make thee olean, yea, by the power he hath. Not trembling on the earth Gill thou the regions, fill the Quarters full.
64 Having arisen wax thoa great, yea, stand thou up im- movable. To thee, O Mitra, I entrnst this Fire-pan for security. May it remain without a break.
65 Thee may the Vasus, Angiras-like, fill with the metre Gayatri. Thee may the Rudras, Angiras-like, fill with the Trishtup metre full, ‘Thee may Adityas, Angirae-like, fill with the metre Jagatt. With tho Axushtap metre may the All-Gods, dear to all men, fill thee full, as Angiras was wont.
66 Intention, Agni, Motive, Hail! Mind, Wisdom, Agni, Motive, Hail! Thought, Knowledge, Agni, Motive, Hail! Rule of Speech, Agni, Motive, Hail! To Manu Lord of creatures, Hail! To Agni dear to all men, Hail!
67 May eyery mortal man elect the friendship of the guiding God. Each one solicits him for wealth: let him seek fame to proaper him. All-hail!
68 Break et nor suffer any harm. Endure, O Mother, and be brave ‘Fis work will thou and Agi do,
69 Be Girm for weal, O Goddess Earth. Made in the wonted smanner thou Art a celestial design. Acceptable to Gods be this oblation. Avise Chow in this sacrifice uninjured. excellent, The Son of Strength, the Wonderful,
71 Abandoning the foeman’s host; pass hither to this company : Assist the men with whom I stand.
72 From the remotest distauce come, Lord of the ed Steeds, + _ bitherward. Do thon Purtshya, Agii, loved of many, overcome our foes.
73 O Agui, whatsoever be the fuel that we lay on thee, May that be butter. unto thee. Be pleased therewith, Most Youthful God. 74, That which the termite eats. away, that over which the, emmet crawls— Butter be all of this,to thee. Be pleased therewith, Most. Youthful God.
75 Bringing to him, with care'unceasing, fodder day | after day as to a stabled courser, * Joying in food: ‘and in’ the growth of riches, taay we thy’ neighbours; ‘Agni; ne’er be injured.
76 While on earth’s navel Agni is enkindled, we call, for, ** aniple increase of our riches, On Agni joying in the drayght, much-lauded, worshipful, victor conquering in battle. 7
77 Whatever hosts there are, fiercely assailant, charging in lengthened lines, drawn up in order, + Whatever thieves there ara, whatever robbers, all these I cast into thy mouth, O Agni.
78 Devaur the burglars with both :tusks,. destroy the robbers with thy teeth. With both thy jaws, thou-Holy: One, eat up those thieves well champed and. chewed.
79 The burglars living among men, the thieves and robbers i in thd wood; ' - Criminals lurking in their laira, these do T lay between thy jaws.
80 Him,who would seek to injure us, the man who looks on us with hate Turn thoy to ashes, and the man who slanders and would” injure us. bat has fallen or been blown off by the wind, “and recitea the text from R. V. VEIT. 91. 20. the text from BY. VHI. 91. 21. Termite: commonly called white ant, a great devourer of wood anda most destructive pest in houses, The first text is taken from A. V. XIX, 65.1, ‘day after day’ being sub- stituted for ‘night after night.’ now kindled.
81 Quickened is this my prieatly rank, quickened is mauly strength and force, Quickened is his victorious power of whom I am the House- hold priest.
83 The arms of these men have I raised, have raised their lustre and their strength, With priestly power I ruin foes and lift my friends to high estate.
83 A share of food, O Lord of Food, vouchsafe us, invigorating food that brings no sickness. Onward, still onward lead the giver. Grant us maintenance both for quadruped and biped. or a Purohita. In the latter oase he recites the text takon, with variations, from A. V. Tif. 19, 1. Quickened: or, sharpened, intensified. .
82 In the case of a prince or noble (RAjavya, Kebatriya) being the Sacri- fiver, We reciten tia taxt, the second lie of whish ia taken from A. V. 11. 19.3.
