L oratiry Fresh Grass with his teeth, Avak& with his gums, Clay with his tooth-sockets, Tegas with his fangs. ‘The tongue-tip for Sarasvati ; I gratify the root of the tongue and the palate with his neigh, Vaja with his jaws, the ‘Waters with his mouth, the Stallion with his testicles, the Adityas with the beard, Path with his eyebrows, Heaven and Earth with his eyelashes, Lightning with the pupils of his eyes. Hail to the white! Hail to the black ! Effeetual are his eyelashes, irresistible are his lower eyelashes; irresistible are his eyelashes, effectual are his lower eyelashes. 2% With his breath I gratify Vata ; with his outbreath the two Nostrils; with bis lower lip the Upayama; with his up- per lip Existenee. With his bright look I please Antara, with his reflection Béhya ; the Whirlpool with his head; ‘Thunder with his frontal bone ; the Lightning-flash with his brain ; Lightning with the pupils of his eyes ; Hear. ing with hia external ears ; Ears with his internal ears; Blood with his lower neck ; Waters with the fleshlesg part of his neck ; Thought with the back neck-tendons; Aditi with his head; Nirriti with his ragged head; Vital Breathings with his roars; Tempest with bis orest.
Brihaspati with his quick spring; Tortoises with his hoofs ; Approaeh with his fetlocks ; Kapifjalas with his heel-ropes; Speed with his two thighs; the Way with his two fore-legs ; the Forest-God with a kneepan ; Agui with his two knees; Pashan with his two fore-feet ; the Asvins with his shoulders ; Rudra with his shoulder-joints. The Horse-sacrifice is continued. In the first tute » Brihmana or Exegetical Treatise as Formulas) oblation is made of the roasted flesh, the various parts of the victim being assigned, with the ery of Svahd! All-bail! to a host of deities and other objects which are regarded as deified for the occasion. gives no explanation, and the meaning is unknown. Vdja: Strength ; or Sacrificial Food. The Path: cf. the Way in verse 8. The white: the light- coloured part of the body. upon a base (upaydma) art thou. See VII. 4. Bright look: according to Mahtdbara, the gloss on the upper part of his body. Antara: interior, Reflection :’glose on the lower part of his body, according to the Commen- tator, Bdliya: exterior, Ragged: nirjarjalpa; the word (apparently meaningless here) is probably used as a sort of play upon the word jarjara, brain.
3 Hair: which has ¢0 often brushed them away. Active: the same word is an epithet of Indra, Hooft: to renovate their shells with the horny material. Cf. A. V. IX. 4. 16: They gave the hooves to tortoises,
4 The first rib is Agni’s; the second Vayu’s; the third Indra’s ; the fourth Soma’s; the fifth Aditi’s; the sixth Indrani’s ; the seventh the Maruts’; the eighth Brihas- pati’s; the ninth Aryaman’s; the teuth Dbatur’s; the eleventh Iudra's the twelfth Varupa’s; the thirteenth Yama’s.
5 (On the left side) the first rib belongs to Indra-Agni; the second to Sarasvati; the third to Mitra; the fourth to the Waters ; the fifth to Nirriti ; the sixth to Agni-Soma; the seveuth to the Serpents ; the eighth to Vishnu; the ninth to Pashan ; the terth to ‘I'vashtar ; the eleventh to Indra ; the twelfth to Varuna; the thirteenth to Yama. The rizht Hank belongs to Heaven and Earth, the left to the All-Gods.
6 The shoulders belong to the Maruts ; the first rib-cartilages to the ‘All-Gods ; the aecond to the Rudras ; the third te the Adityas ; the tail belongs to Vayu; the hind-quarters to Agni-Soma. I gratify the two Curlews with the hips ; Indra-Brihaspati with the thighs; Mitra-Varuna with the groins; Approach with the buttocks ; Streugth with the two cavities of the loins.
7 I gratify Pashan with the rectum ; Blind-worms with the large intestines ; Serpents with the entrails ; Worms with the guts; the Waters with the bladder ; Scrotum with the testicles ; the Vajins with his penis; Offspring with his seed; Blue jays with his bile; Fissures with his arms; Kashmas with his lumps of duag.
8 His chest belongs to Indra ; his belly to Aditi ; his clavicles to the Quarters ; his nether hind-part to Aditi. I gratify Clouds with his aorta ; Firmament with his pericardium ; Mist with his belly ; the two Chakravikas with his car- diac bones; Sky with his kidneys; Mountains with his ducts ; Rocks with his spleen ; Ant-hills with his lungs ; Shrubs with bis heart-vessels ; Streams with his veins ; Lakes with his flanks; Sea with his belly; Vaigvanara with his ashes,
9 I gratify Separation with bis navel ; Butter with his flavour; the Waters with his broth ; Sunbeams with his drops of fat; Hoar-frost with his hent; Ice with his marrow; Hail- stones with his tears ; ‘Thunderbolts with the rheum of his eyes ; Rakshasas with bis blood; Bright things with his limbs ; Stars with bis beauty ; Karth with his skin. All-bail to Jumbaka !
10 In the beginning rose Hiranyagarbha, etc., as in XIII. 4; XXII 1.
11 Who by his grandeur, ete., as in XXIII. 3.
12 Whose, by his might, are these snow-covered mountains, and men call sea and Ras& bis possession : Whose are these arms, whose are these heavenly regions. What God shall we adore with our oblation 3
13 Giver of vital breath, of power and vigour, he whose com- mandment all the Gods acknowledge : Tne Lord of death, whose shade is life immortal. What God shall we adore with our oblation?
14 May powers auspicious come to us from every side, never deceived, unhindered and victorious, That the Gods ever may be with us for our gain, our guar- dians day by day, unceasing in their care.
15 Moy the auspicions favour of the Gods be ours, on us descend the bounty of the righteous Gods. The friendship of the Gods have we devoutly sought : so may the Gods extend our life that we may live.
16 We call them hither with a hymn of olden time, Bhaga, the friendly Daksha, Mitra, Aditi, Aryaman, Varuna, Soma, the Agvius. May Sarasvati, aus- Picious, grant felicity.
17 May the Wind waft to us that pleasant medicine, may Earth ‘our Mother give it, and our Father Heaven, And the joy-giving stones that press the Soma’s juice. As- vins, may ye, for whom our spirits long, hear this.
18 Him we invoke for aid who reigns supreme, the Lor« of all that stands or moves, inspirer of the soul, That Pashan may promote the increase of our wealth, our keeper and our guard infallible for our good.
19 Illustrious far and wide, may Indra prosper us: may Pishan prosper us, the Master of all wealth. May Tarkshya with uninjured fellies prosper us: Brihaspati vouchsafe to us prosperity.
20 The Maruts, Sons of Prisni, borne by spotted steeds, moving in glory, oft visiting holy rites, Sages whose tongue is Agni and their eyes the Sun,-—hither let all the Gods for our protection cume.
21 Gods, may we with our ears listen to what is good, and with our eyes see what is good, ye Holy Ones. With limbs and bodies firm may we extolling you attain the term of life appointed by the Gods,
22 A hundred autumns stand before us, O ye Gods, within whose space ye bring our bodies to decay; Within whose space our sons become fathers in turn. Break ye not in the midst our course of fleeting life.
23 Aditi is the heaven, Aditi is mid-air, Aditi is the Mother and the Sire aud Son.
31 May the fleet Courser’s halter and his heel-ropes, the head- stall aud the girths and cords about him, ‘And the grass put within his mouth to bait him,—among the Gods, too, let all these be with thee.
33 What part of the Steed’s flesh the fly hath eaten, or is left sticking to the post or hatchet, Or to the slayer’s hands and nails adhereth,—among the Gods, too, may all this be with thee.
33 Food undigested steaming from his belly, and any odour of raw flesh remaining, This Jet the immolators set in order and dress the sacrifice with perfect cooking.
34 What from thy body which with fire is roasted, when thou art set upon the spit, distilleth,— Let not that lie on earth or grass uegiected, but to the long- ing Gods let all be offered.
35 They who, observing that the Horse is ready, call out and say, The smell is good ; remove it; And, craving meat, await the distribution,—may their approving help promote our Inbour.
36 The trial-fork of the flesh-cooking caldron, the vessels out of which the broth is sprinkled, The warming-pots, the covers of the dishes, hooks, carving- boards,—all these attend the Charger.
37 Let not the fire, smoke-scented, make thee crackle, nor glowing caldron smell and brenk to pieces. Offered, beloved, approved, and consecrated, —such Charger do the Gods accept with favour.
33 The starting-place, his place of rest and rolling, the ropes wherewith the Charger’s feet were fastened, The water that he drauk, the food he tasted,—among the Gods, too, may all these attend thee.
39 The robe they spread upon the Horse to clothe him, the upper covering and the golden trappings, The halters which restrain the Steed, the heel-ropes, —all these, as grateful to the Gods, they offer.
40 If one, when seated, with excessive urging hath with his heel or with his whip distressed thee, All these thy woes, as with oblation’s ladle at sacrifices, with my prayer I banish.
41 The four-and-thirty ribs of the swift Courser, kin to the Gods, the slayer’s hatchet pierces, Cut ye with skill so that the parts be fawless, and piece by piece declaring them dissect them.
42 Of Tvaslitar’s Courser there is one dissector: this is the cus- tom: two there are who guide him. Such of his limbs as I divide in order, all these, amid the lumps, in fire T offer.
43 Let not thy dear soul burn thee as thou comest, let not the hatchet linger in thy body. Let not a greedy clumsy immolator, missing the joints, mangle thy limbs unduly.
44 No, here thon diest not, thou art not injured: only by easy paths to Gods thou goest. Both Bays, both Spotted Mares are now thy fellows, and to the Ass’s pole is yoked the Courser.
45 May this Steed bring us all-sustaining riches, wealth in good kine, good horses, manly offspring. Freedom from sin may Aditi vouchsafe us; the Steed with our oblations gain us lordship !
