2 Hence pour ye forth the flowing juice, Soma, best Sacrificial
food. He who, man’s friend, hath run within the waters hath with the pressing-stones poured out the Soma,
3 Purified by Vayu’s strainer, Soma that has passed away for- ward is Indra’s proper friend. Purified by Vayu’s strainer, Soma that has passed away backward is Indra’s proper friend.
4 By means of this eternal sieve may Sarya’s Daughter purify The Soma that flows forth from thee.
5 Soma with Wine, pressed, filtered for the banquet, cleanses priest, noble, brilliancy and vigour. God, with the Bright give Deities enjoyment i give food with flavour to the Sacrificer. Bouks XIX—XXI Contain the formulas of the Sautrimagi, « sacrifice originally instituted to expiate and counteract the evil effects of excessive indulgence in Soma-drinking. Seo X. 91. The coremony is prescribed as & means of obtaining geueral eminence; for a dethroned king to procure his restoration, for a Kahatriya to assure victory, for a Vaigya to acquire cattle and wealth. It consists mainly in the offering, to the Asvins, Sara vati aud Indra, of Surt o apirituous liquor concocted of gashpa (husked rice or young grass), éokman (green barley), and l4ja (parched grain) ground up with some roots to serve as yeast, and the liquor of two Odauas of messes of rice, and Syamaka or millet boiled in water; the mixture being called Mésara, The type of the eacrifice is the cure of Indra, by Sarasvat! and the Asvins, when hie was suffering from over-indulgence ia his favourite beverage. The name is derived from Sutraman, the Good Pal ae or Protector, Indta, See Hillsbrandt, Ritual-Litteratur, pp. mixture and transubstantiation has sacrificially become Soma. swell. Mabfdhara supplies adhvaryup (the Adhvaryu) as the understood nominative of ‘poured out’.
8 Cf. %. 91. Véyu's strainer’: or cleansing power, Forward: rejected through the mouth from the over-loaded stouneh. Mahidbara, Flavour; clarified butter, ete, . in X. 32, ‘Taken upona base art thou. I take thee for the Aevin Pair, Thee for Sarasvatt. Thee for Indra the Good Deliverer. This is thy home. For splendour thee. Thee for man’s vigour. Thee for strength.
7 For each of you is made a God-appointed place; so grant to me a portion in the highest sphere, Sur& the strong art thou. This here js Soma, Entering thine own place do me no mischief. ® Taken upon a base art thoy. Splendour of Asvins, Saras- vati’s manly vigour, might of Indra; ‘Phis ig thy home. | take thee for enjoyment, I take thee for delight, take thee for greatness.
9 Thow ert lustre: give me lustre. Thou art manly vigour; give me manly vigour. Thon art strength: give me strength. Thou art energy; give me energy. Thon grt passion; Giye me passion, Thou art conquering might ; give me conquering might, .
10 May she, Vishichiks, who guards these two, the tiger and the wolf, The lion and the wingdd hawk, may she guard this man from distress,
11 When, a delighted boy, I bruised my mother ag I sucked her breast, . Free from my debt, 0 Agni, I become thereby. My parents are by me unharmed. United are ye all: witb bliss unite me. Parted are ye, keep me apart from evil.
13 The Asvins, the Physicians, Gods, stretched out the healing sacrifice, Sarasvati with speech wasa Physician, all with heroic powers investing Indra,
13 Symbols of Diksha are grass-buds, of Prayaniya sprouts of corn, Of Soma-purchasing fried grains are symbols, Soma-shoots and meath,
14 Atithya’s sign is Masara, the Gharma’s symbol Nagnahu. Three nights with Sura poured, this is the symbol of the Upasads.
15 Emblem of purchased Soma is Parisrut, foaming drink effused: Indra’s balm milked for Indra by the Agvins and Sarasvatt.
16 The Sncrificer’s seat is the throne’s symbol, the jar contain- ing Sura of the Altar. ‘The mid-space is the northern Altar’s symbol : the cloth for filtering is the physician.
17 Altar by Altar is produced, power, holy grass by holy grass: av a is by the stake obtained, by Agni Agni curried forth.
18 The Agvins are the Soma store, Sarasvati the sacred hearth. For Indra formed ix Indra’s seat, the Matrons’ Hall, the house-lord’s fire. Sanskrit Texts, V.94. Healing suorifice: the prototype of the Sautré- Many miracles of healing are attributed to the Agvins, the divine Physicians, the heralds of light, who recreate the world of life after the darkness of night. See The Hymns of the Rigveda, Index. close interconnexion of the Sautrdmant with Soma sacrifice, the sacrificial elements, vessels, implements, laude and hymns that are used in the for- mer being regarded as forms, types, symbols or reproductions of those employed in the latter. Dtkeh4: Conseoration, Grass-buds: or young rass. See introductory note. Prdyuntya: the name of an introductory bettog ate Soma sacribce, Meath or honey. place of ascrifice, See V.1—4 Mdsara: see introduotory note. Ghurma: the caldron for hot libations. Nagnwhu: a root used as yeast. U‘pasada: sce V. 8. Purisrut: a kind of beer, prepared from concocted herbs and fermented. Sura, used at the Sautr&mant sacrifice. The physician: who is to cure Indra
18 Sacred hearth: Agnihra, where the sacrificial fire ia kindled, Mut rons’ Hall: see IV, 34, House-lord’s fire: the Garhapatya,
19 Orders he gains by orders, by Apris Apris of sacrifice, Post-offerings by fore-offerings, and by calls of Vashat Abutis.
20 By victims he gains victims, by ground rice-cakes sacrifi- cial food, By metres kindling-verses, and Vashat-calls by Inviting- prayers,
21 Grain roasted, gruel, barley-meal, grains of rice roasted, milk and curd Are types of Soma: mingled milk, sweet whey, of sacrificial food.
22 Type of parched corn is jujube-fruit ; wheat of the roasted grains of rice ; Jujube the type of barley-meal, and Indra- grains of gruel-groats, :
23 Symbol of milk are barley-grains, symbol of ourd are jujube- fruits. Whey is the type of Soma, and milk-mixture type of Somn's pap.
24 The Strophe is the cry, Bid hear! the answer is the antis- trophe. Sacrifice | is the Dhayya’s form, Pragathas’ the Yajamahas.
25 By verse-halves comes the Ukthas’ type, Nivids by Padas he obtains. The type of Sastras is obtained by Pranavas, Soma by milk. his nssistnt. pris: « clase of propitiatory hymns addressed to Agni us forms and titles. igveda, Index, Post-offerings:
26 Gained by the Agvins is the morn’s libation, Indra’s liba tion of mid-day by Indra. Sarasvati obtains the third outpouring, the offering sacred tw the Vigve Devas. gains the vat for Suma. By the two jars he gains two eleansing-vessels, and by the cooking-pot the pot for cooking.
28 By sacrificial texts are gained the Grabes, and by the Gra- has lauds und laud-arrangements, By metres are obtained Ukthas aud praise-songs, and by the Séma-ehant the Ayabhritha,
29 Draughts he obtains by pouring out libations, and wishes hy the utterance of praises, By Samyu he obtains Patnisamyajas, and Consummation by Samishtayajus,
80 He gains by vow of fasting Consecration, by Consecration gains the priestly guerdon. He gains by priestly guerdon faith ; by faith comes know- ledge of the trath.
31 So ee the type of vactifice wag formed by Brahm’ and the jade. All this he gains, when juice is shed, in the Santramsnt sacrifice.
32 Ther rite with sacred grass, wine, store of heroes, the mighty ones speed on with adorations. May we, sweet-singing sacrificers, setting Soma mid Gods in heaven, give joy to Indra,
33 All essenoa of thine own in plants collected, all strength of Soma when poured out with Sura— Therewith impel with juy the sacrifice, Saraavati, the Agvins, Indra, Agni.
34 That which Sarssvati poured out for Indra, by Asvins bronght from Namuchi the demon, This flowing drop, brilliant and full of sweetness, I drink and feed on here, the King, the Soma,
35 Whatever portion of the savoury fluid is clinging here, what Indra drank with powers, That drop thereof with pure and holy spirit I drink aud feed upon, the King, the Soma.
36 To Fathers who claim Svadha be Svadha and homage | To Grandfathers who claim Svadha be Svadhé and homage ! To Great-grandfathers who claim Svadb§ be Svadha aud homage ! The Fathers have eaten. The Fathers have rejoiced. The Fathers have been satisfied. Fathers, be ys purified,
87 Cleanse me the Fathers who enjoy Soma! Grandfathers make me clean ! May Great-grandfathers cleanse me witb a sieve that brings a century. May my Grandfathers cleanse me, may my Great-grand- fathers make me clean, With sieve that briugs a century may I obtain full length of life.
38 Agni, thon ponrest life: send down upon us food and vigor- ous strength, Drive thou misfortune far away.
83 With mortars (inortar-shaped aups) of Paliga wood the Pratiprasth tar offers librtious of Surd in the Southern fire und recites the formula nddrese- ed to the liquor. Joy: the exhilaration produced by the spirituous draught. $4 Namuohi: who bad stolen it from Indra. See X. 88, and Muir, 0. S. Texts, V. p. 94, note, of departed ancestors. Svadi1: food ; oblation ; aleo a sacrificial exclaina- tion, The residue of the three Sura libations to the Asvins, Sarasvait, and Indra ia now offered outside the enclosing-aticks, ou the coals uf the ‘Abavantya fire, to Ancestral Spirits of three grades.
87 A jar of SurA pierced with a hundred holes is hung over the Southern fire-place, and a.sieve or strainer made of hair of horse, cow, got, and wool, with gold, is placed beneath. As the liquor drops thereun the Sacrificer recites texta for his purification. 12 spirit make me clean. Cleanse me ail things that be! Do thou, O Jatavedas, make me clean.
40 Purify me, O Agni, God, refulgent with thy pure bright sieve, With powers according to thine own.
410 Agni, may the cleansing sieve, diffused through all thy glow, Holy devotion, make me clean.
42 May Pavam4na with his sieve, Guest of all tribes, cleanse ns to-day, He who is Cleaner make us clean,
43 Sayitar, God, by both of these, libation, purifying power, Purify me on every side.
44 Dear to all Gods hath come the cleansing Goddess, she who contains these many smooth-backed figures, Phrough her may we in sacrificial banquets taking our plea. sure be the lords of riches.
45 ae Fathers who in Yama's realm are equal and unanim- us— Their world js Svadha, reverence. To Gods lot sacrifice be paid.
46 Equals, unauimous, my folk yet living among those who live— Qn me be set their.glory through a hundred years in this our world,
47 I bave heard mention of two several pathways, way of the Fathers, way of Guds and mortals. On these two roads each moviug creature travels, each thing between the Father aud the Mother.
48 May this my sacrifice bring store of childxen, with ten brave sons, full-companied, for welfare— Life-winuing, winuing offspring, winning cattle, winuing this world of ours aud peace and safety. May Agni make my progeny abundant. Do ye confer food, milk, and mauly vigour.
49 May they ascend, the lowest, highest, midmost, the Fathers who deserve a share of Soma. May Fathers who have gained the world of spirits, gentle and righteous, aid us when we call them.
50 Our Fathers are Angirases, Navagvas, Atharvans, Blrigus, who deserve the Suma. May these the holy look on us with favour: may we. enjoy their gracious loving-kindness.
51 Qur ancient Fathers who deserve the Soma, who came, most noble, to our Soma banquet— With these let Yama, yearning with the yearning, rejoicing eat our offerings ut bis pleasure.
52 Thou, Soma, art preéminent for wisdom: along the straight- est path thou art our leader. Our prudent Fathers by thy wisdom, Soma, dealt out among the Gods their share of treasure.
53 For our sage Fathers, Soma Pavamaua, of old performed by thee their sacred duties. Fighting unvanquished, open the enclosures: enrich us. with large gifts of steeds and heroes.
54 Associate with the Fathers thou, 0 Soma, hast spread thy- self abroad through earth and heaven. So with oblation let us serve thee, Indu, and so let us be come the lords of riches.
55 Fathers who sit on sacred grass, come help us: these offer. ings we have made for you; accept them. So come to us with most auspicious favour, and give us health and strength without a trouble,
56 I have attained the gracions-minded Fathers, have gained @ son and progeny from Vishnu. They who enjoy pressed juices with oblation, seated on sacred grass, come oftenest hither.
57 May they, the Fathers, worthy of the Soma, invited to their favourite oblations Laid on the sacred grass, come nigh and listen: may they be gracious unto us and bless us.
58 May they our Fathers whom the flames have tasted, worthy of Suma, come on God-ward pathways, Enjoying at this sacrifice their portion, may they be gracious unto us and bless us.
59 Fathers whom Agui’s flames have tasted, come ye nigh: ye kindly leaders, tuke ye each your proper place. Eat sacrificial food presented on the grass: grant riches with a multitude of hero sons,
74 The Hamsa throned in light drank up by metre Soma from the fluods. By Law, ete.
75 Prajapati by Brahma drank the easence from the foaming food, the princely power, milk, Soma juice. By Law, etc.
76 The generative part euters the yont: it leaves aside the retas wud the mdtra. The caul-invested embryo leaves by its birth the covering folds. By Law, eto.
77 Viewing both forms Prajipati gave truth and falsehood different shapes. Prajapati assigned the lack of faith to falsebood, faith to truth. By Law, ete.
78 By holy lore Prajapati drank up both forms, pressed and un- pressed. By Law, ete. drank out the bright, the milk, the Soma juice. By Law, ete,
80 Wise, with mind, lead, and thread of wool the sages twine an amulet, Sarasvatt, Savitar, Varuna, the Agving span sacrifice and healed his form for Indra.
81 This his immortal shape with mighty powers three Deities bestowing gifts compoutded. His hair they made with sprouts of grass and barley, aud rousted grain with skin and flesh supplied him.
82 His inner shape Sarasvati arranges aud, borne on bright paths, the Physician Agvins: With Misaras and sieve his bone aud marrow, as on the Oxen’s hide they lay the liquor.
83 By thought Sarasvati with both Nasatyas forms lovely trea- sure and a beauteous body. Like shuttle through the loom the steady ferment mixes the red juive with the fouming spirit.
84 By milk they generated bright immortal, productive seed, by Sura seed from urine, Chasing afar folly and ill intention, crude food and wiud and meat that loads the stomach,
85 Heart with his heart Indra Good Guardian gendered: with rice-cake Savitar gave truth its being. Varun, doctoriug the lungs and liver, forms, as with Vayu cups, the gall ant kidneys.
86 Cooking-pots pouring honey were the entraile: like a well- milking cow the pins were bowels. A hawk’s wing was the spleen: through mighty powers the stool as mother was navel and belly.
87 The pitcher wag the father of the rectum by powers, the womb which first contained the infant. Plain was the hundred-strenming fount as penis: the jar poured forth libations tv the Father.
83 His face the basket, thence his head; the strainer his tongue, bis mouth "Sarasvati and Agvins, The Chipya was his rump, his leech the filter, the bladder was his penis keen with ardour.
89 Asvins with both cups made his eye immortal, the goat and ‘cooked oblation gave it keenness, With wheat eyelashes and with jnjube eyebrows they clothe as’twere a black and brilliant figare.
90 The sheep, the ram to give his nostril vigour. the immortal path of breath by both libations, By Indra-grains and sacrificial jujubes Sarasvatt produced throngh-breath and nose hairs.
83 Nisutyas: a title of the Asvins, explained by Indian Commentators as ‘not untrue’, na-asatyu, See Micdouell, Vetio Mythelogy, p. 49. Fer- ment: Naguabu, the root used as yeust. See verse 14.
85 Truth: Indra’s quality of truthfulness. Vdyu cups; See verse 27.
87 The pitcher: ot jar, for holding Suri, The infant: in the shape of the Sura contained in it. Fount: the pitcher, See verse 87. + eee verae a. Chapya : a kind of sacrificial vessel, the
91 The bull fur etrength made Indra’s form: the immortal hearing for both his ears by two libations. Barley and sacred grass composed his eyebrows: from his mouth came the jujube and sweet honey.
92 Hair of the wolf was on his waist and body : the beard upon his face was hair of tigers. Lion’s hair were his locks, for fame and beauty, worn on his head, his crest and sheen and vigour.
93 The Asvins, Leeches, joined his limbs and body, Sarasvatt put limbs and frame together, Giving the form and vital power of Indra, hundredfold, deathless and delightful lustre.
94 Sarasvati, as Consort of the Agvins, bears in her womb the nobly-fashioned Infant. King Varuna with waters’ wealthy essence begetting Indra iu the floods for glory.
