2 Ida, come hither. Aditi, come hither. Sarasvati, come
hither. Come hither, So-and-80. Come hither, So-and-So. Come hither, 8o-and-So,
3 Thou art a zone for Aditi, a diadem for Indrant. Pishan art thou. Spare some for the Gharma.
4 Overflow for the Agvins. Overflow for Sarasvatt. Overflow for Indra. All-hail, what belongs to Indra! All-hail, what belongs to Indra! All-hail, what belongs to Indra!
5 That breast of thine, exhaustless, fount of pleasure, wealth- giver, treasure-finder, free-bestower, Wherewith thon rearest all things that are choicest,—bring that, Sarasvatt, that we may drain it, Throughout the spacious middle air I travel.
6 Thou art Gayatra metre. Thou art Trishtup metre. With Heaven and Earth I grasp thee. With the Firmament I raise thee up. Iudra and Agvins, drink ye the hot draught of sweet honey: sacrifice, ye Vasus. Vat! All-huil to the rain-winving beam of the Sun !
7 Thee with Svaha to Vita the sea. Thee with Svaba to Vita the flood. Thee with Svaha to Vata the unconquerable. Thee with Svah& to Vata the irresistible, Thee with Svah& to Vata the protection-seeker. Thee with Svaba to Vata the non-destructive.
8 Thee with Svaha to In tra Lord of Vasus. Thee with Svaba to Indra Lord of Rudras. Thee with Svaha to Indra killer of foes. Thee with Svahi to Savitar attended by Ribhn, Vibhu, and Vaja. Thee with Svaha to Brihasputi beloved of all the Gods.
9 Svaha to Yama attended by the Angirases, attended by the Fathers ! Svaha to the Gharma ! The Gharma for the Father !
10 Here hath he worshipped, seated south, all the sky-regions, all the Gods. Drink, Aevins, of the heated draught, the Svaha-conseerated mead,
11 Tu heaven lay thou this sacrifice ; lay thou this sacrifice in heaven. To sacrificial Agni hail ! May bliss be ours from Yajus texts,
12 Drink, Agvins, with your daily helps, the Gharma, streng- thener of hearts. To him who draweth out the thread be homage, and to Heaven and Eerth.
13 The Gharma have the Asvins drunk: with Heaven and Earth have they agreed. Here, verily, be their boons bestowed.
14 Overflow for food. Overflow for energy. Overflow for the Priesthood. Overflow for the Nobility. Overflow for Heaven and Earth. Thou, O duteous one, art Duty. In- nocent one, in us establish manly powers ; establish the People.
20 Synare, far-spread is the sucrifice’s navel : it spreads for us wide, full of all existence, sprends wide for us full of complete existenee. We turn against the hate and guiles of him who keeps an alien law.
31 This, Gharma! is thy liquid store. Swell out aud wax in strength thereby. May we tuo grow in strength and wax to greatness
22 Louily the tawny stallion neighed, mighty, like Mitra fairtonee. ‘Together with the Sun the sea, the store shone out with flashing light.
23 To us let Waters and let Plants be friendly; to him who hates us, whom we hate, unfriendly.
24 Lookiug upon the loftierlight ahove the datkness wehave come ToStirra, Gol among the Gods, the light that is most excellent.
25 A brand art thou, fuiu would we thrive. Fuel art thou, and splendour : Give me splendour. :
26 Far as the heaven and earth are spread in compass, far a8 the Seven Rivers are extended, So vast thy cp which I with strength am taking, India, unharmed in me, uninjured ever.
27 In me be that great heto power, in me be strength and mental force. The Gharma shines with triple light, with lustre fulgent far away, with holy lore, with brillianey.
28 Brought hither is the seed of milk, Through each succeed ing year may we enjoy the bliss of draining it. Invited, I enjoy a share of that which hath been offered me, the savoury dranghtby Iudra drunk und tasted by Prajapati. Altar. Navel: the central and chief point. Keeps an alien law: follows other than Vedic wbservances. Cf. R. V. V. 20. 2. equally with ; as brilliantly as. The aea: the Caldron with ite liquid com tents. The store : of blessings. pit. ‘he formula is reneated from VI. 22.
