We have reached this earth’s place of sacrificing, the place wherein all Deities delighted. Crossing by Rik, by Saman, and by Yajus, may we rejoice in food and growth of riches, Gracious to me be these Celestial Waters! Protect me, Plant. O Knife, forbear to harm him.
ers of holy oil, with oil shall cleanse us. For, Goddesses, they bear off all defilement. I rise up from them purified and brightened. The form of Consecration and of Fervour art thou, I put thee on, the kind and blissful, maintaining an agreeable appearance.
3 The Great Ones’ milk art thou. Giver of splendour art thou: bestow on me the gift of splendour. Pupil art thou of Vritra’s eye. The giver of eyes art thou. Give me the gift of vision.
4 Purify me the Lord of Thought! Purify me the Lord of Speech! Purify me God Savitar with perfect strainer, with the beams of Sirya! Of thee, Lord of the Strainer! who art by the strainer purified, ‘With what desire I purify myself, may I accomplish it.
5 We come to you for precious wealth, O Gods, as sacrifice proceeds, O Gods, we call on you to give blessings that wait on sacrifice.
6 Svaha! from mind the sacrifice, Svaha! from spacious firmament. Svaha! from Dyaus and Prithivi. Svaha! from Wind I seize. Svaha!
7 To Resolution, Motive, Agni, Svaha! All-hail to Wisdom, and to Mind, and Agni! All-hail to Consecration, Fervour, Agni! Hail to Sarasvati, Pdshan, and Agni! Ye vast, diviue, all-beneficial Waters, ye Heaven and Earth and spacious Air between them, Let us adore Brihaspati with oblation, All-hail !
8 May every mortal man elect the friendship of the guiding God, Each one solicits him for wealth: let him seek fame to pros- per him.
9 Rik’s, Siman’s counterparts are ye. I touch you. Protect me till the sacrifice be ended. Thou art a place of refuge. Give me refuge. Obeisance unto thee! Forbear to harm me.
10 Strength of Angirases art thou. Wool-soft, bestow thou strength on me. Thon art the garment-knot of Soma. Vishnu’s refuge art thou, the Sacrificer’s refuge. understood. Various bendings of fingers and final olosing of the hands are prescribed  Dyaus and Prithivt: Heaven and Earth. called Audgrabhana or Uplifting, because they raise the Sucrificer to heaven, Resolution : the intention or purpose of sacrificing. Leader. ground for conseeration purposes, are addressed and touched. Cownterparts : in full aconrd, a8 used in sacred ceremonies, with the recited verses and chanted hymns of sacrifice. The white on the skins resembles the Itik, and the blaok the SAman, Thou art, eto.: he kneels with his right knee on the skin, and one of Mufja grass, Angiruscs: descendants of Angiras, a sewi-divine Thou art the womb of Indra, Make the crops produce abundant grain. Staud up erect, O Tree. Protect me from harm until this sacrifice be ended.
11 Prepare ye vow-food. Agni is the Brahman, Agni is sacri- fice, the tree is holy. For aid we meditate divine Intelligence, most merciful, Free-giver, bringing worship. May it guide us gently, as we would. Favour us Gods, mind-born, endowed with mind and intel- lectual might! ‘All-hail to them! May they be our pro- tectors.
12 Waters that we have drunk! become refreshing, become auspicions draughts within our belly. Free from all sin and malady aud sickness, may they be pleasant to our taste, divine Ones, immortal, strength- eners of eternal Order. i3 This is thy sacrificial form. Not offspring, waters I discharge. Freeing from sin and consecrate by Svaha enter ye the earth. Be thou united with the earth.
14 O.Agni, watch thou well. May we take joy in most refresh- ing sleep. Protect us with unceasing care. From slumber waken us again,
15 Thought hath returned to me, and life; my breath and soul have come again. Our bodies’ guard, unscathed, Vaisvanara Agni preserve us from misfortune and dishonour.
16 Thou, Agni, art the guardian God of sacred vows among mankind, thou meet for praise at holy rites. Grant this much, Soma! bring yet more. God Savitar who giveth wealth hath given treasure unto us.
17 This is thy form, O Bright One, this thy lustre. Combine with this thy form and go to splendour, teoeenon art thou, upheld by mind, and Vishnu loveth thee.
18 Moved by thine impulse who hast true impulsion, may I obtain a prop to stay my body. ba thou, glistering art thou, immortal, dear to all the Gods, ,
19 Thought art thon, mind, intelligence, the Guerdon, royal, worshipful, Aditi with a double head. Succeed for us in going forth, succeed for us in thy return, May Mitra bind thee by the foot. May Pashan guard thy pathways for Indra whose eye is over all. I, following Immortals, have arisen with longer life, with a good life before me.
29 Now have we entered on the path that leads to bliss without a foe, The path whereon a man escapes all enemies and gathers wealth.
30 The skin of Aditi art thou. Sit on the lap of Aditi. The Bull hath propped the sky and air’s mid-region, the compass of the broad earth hath he measured. He, King Supreme, approached all living creatures. ‘Truly: all these are Varuna’s ordinances.
31 Over the woods the air hath he extended, put milk in kine and vigorous speed in horses, Set intellect in hearts and fire in houses, Sarya in heaven and Soma on the mountain.
32 Ascend the eye of Sirya, mount the pupil set in Agni’s eye Where, radiant through the Wise One, thou speedest along with dappled steeds.
33 Approach, ye oxen, fit to bear the yoke ; be yoked without a tear. Slaying no man, urging the Brahman forward, go happily to the Sacrificer’s dwelling.
34 Lord of the World, thou art my gracious helper : move for- ward on thy way to all the stations. Let not opponents, let not robbers find thee, let not malig- nant wolves await thy coming. Fly thou away having become a falcon. Go to the dwelling of the Sacrificer. That is the special place for us to rest in.
29 He pute the Soma on his head and goes towards the cart in which the Soma has _been brought, reciting the text taken, with one variation, from R. V. VI. 51. 16.
30 The antelope-skin is spread in the Soma cart by the Adhvaryu who recites the formula, Skin of Aditi: SeeI. 14, Sit: O Soma. The Bull : the mighty Varuna, kere meaning Soma, The text is taken, with alteration of two words, from R. V. VIII. 42. 1. Approached : ‘ pervades :" Muhi- dhara; ‘hath taken his seat over:’ Eggeling. Living creatures : or, worlds. yi wraps the Soma in a cloth, reciting the texts taken from R. V.
32 He addresses the antelope-skin which he hangs up in front of the Soma-cart. Wise One ; the All-knowing Sun. The skin, representing the Sun and Agni, will keep off evil spirits.
33 Ye ozen': the pair that draw the Soma-cart. The Brakman: the priest, or the sacrifice. Happily : or, safely, uninjured by evil spirits.
34 Spoken by the Sacrificer. Lord of the World: Soma is addressed. Stations : the PatuisAla or Matron’s Hall, the Havirdhana or Oblation- Store, and other places in the sacrificial enclosure.
35 Do homage unto Varuna’s and Mitra’s eye: offer this solemn worship to the Mighty God, ‘Who seeth far away, the Ensign born of Gods. Sing praises wato Sirya, to the Son of Dyaus.
36 Thou art a prop for Varuna to rest on. Ye are the pins that strengthen Varuna’s pillar. Thou art the lawful seat where Varuna sitteth. Sit on the lawful seat where Varuna sitteth.
37 Such of thy glories as with poured oblations men honour, may they all invest our worship. Wealth-giver, furtherer with troops of heroes, sparing the brave, come, Soma, to our houses.
85 ‘The Sacrificer recites the text taken from R V. X. 87.1, Varuna's and Mitea’s eye: Sdrya, the Sun represented by the Boma, Dyaus; Zeus, Heaven or Sky personified,
36 Thou: the prop that supports the pole of the cart, which has now become the support of Varupa Fepresented by the Soma. . Ye: two wooden pegs that keep the prop steady. The lawful seat: he addresses the ceat or throne on which Soma is placed, the antelope-skin having been spread * ‘over it. Varuna is represented by Soma throughout the verse.
