Onr sacrifice, God Savitar, speed onward : speed to his share the sacrifice’s patron. May the celestial Gandharva, cleanser of thought and will, make clean our thought and purpose : the Lord of Speech sweeten the food we offer.
Taken upon a baseartthou. I take thee, draught acceptable to Indra. This is thy home. Thee, welcomest to Indra, Thee set in waters, butter, realm of ether. Taken upon veeIndra, Thee seated in the sky, earth, air’s mid-region, among the Gods and in the vault of heaven. Taken, etc. as above.
3 The strength-arousing essence of the waters, gathered in the Sun, Essence of waters’ essence, that, most excellent, I take for you. Taken, etc., as above.
4 Cups of strength-giving sacrifice, inspirers of the sage’s ymn— Of you, the handleless, have I collected all the sap and strength. Taken, ete., as above. United are ye twain: with bliss unite me. Parted are ye: keep me apart from evil.
5 Thou art the thunderbolt of Indra, winner of wealth: with thee may this man win him riches. In gain of wealth we celebrate with praises her, Aditi by name, the Mighty Mother, On whom this Universe of life hath settled. Thereon God Savitar promote our dwelling !
6 Amrit is in the Waters, in the Waters healing medicine. Yea, Horses! at our praises of the Waters grow ye fleet and strong. Whatever wave, O ye celestial Waters, wealth-giving, towering high, and swiftly rushing, is yours, therewith may this man win him riches.
7 It was the wind, or it was thought, or the Gandharvas twenty-seven— ‘These at the first harnessed the horse: they set the power of speed in him,
8 Steed, being yoked grow wind-ewift : be beanteous as Indra’s right-hand steed. Omniscient Maruts harness thee! Tvashtar put ewiftness in thy feet !
9 What speed, O Horse, was laid in thee in secret, what passed in wind, bestowed upon the falcon, With that same strength be strong for us, O Courser, wealth-winning and victorious in battle. Starting to run your course, winners of riches, smell ye Brihaspati’s portion, O ye Horses.
10 By impulse of God Savitar, true Impeller, may I ascend Brihaspati’s highest heaven. and important part of the Vajapeya. The Sacrificer addresses the Chariot which he takes down from its stand, draws to the south of the Chatvala or pit, and places by the altar. On whom : as Earth, A.V. 1 4.4, the first line of which is taken from R. V. 1.28.19. Amritr nectar or ambrosia. blems of rapidity. Gandharvas: eee II. 8. note; here representing the Nakshatres, Lumar Mansious or stages through which the Moon passes, and. signifying the flight of time. thy heart. Jn battle: or, at the gathering (of the Gods at sacrifice), sooord. ing to the Gatapatha-Brihmana, Brihaspati’s portion: s mess of boiled wild-rice, dedicated to Brihaspati the representative of the priesthood. The horses are made to smell it in order to assure their victory. Jowing line of text if the Sscrificer is a Brahman, Indra: as the represén~ By impulse of God Savitar, true Impeller, may I ascend the highest heaven of Indra. By impulse of God Savitar, true Impeller, Bribaspati’s highest heaven have I ascended. By impulse of God Savitar, true Impeller, I have ascended Indra’s loftiest heaven.
11 Bribaspati, win the prize. Lift up your voiees to Brihaspati. Make ye Brihaspati win the prise. Do thou, O Indra, win the prize. To Indra lift your voices up. Make Indra winner of the prize.
12 True hath been this your league whereby ye made Brihas- pati win the prize. Brihaspati have ye caused to win the prize. Be freed, ye Forest-lords. Faithful was this your league whereby ye have made Indra win the prize. Ye have wade Indra win the prize. Be yé set free, ye Forest-lords.
183 Through impulse of God Savitar, true Impeller, mine be Bribaspati’s prize who winneth prizes. On to the goal, ye Steeds, winners of prizes, blocking the ways and meting out the courses !
14 Bound by the neck and at the flanks and in the mouth, that vigorous Courser lends new swiftness to his speed. Drawing himself together as his strength allows, Dadhikras speeds along the windings of the paths. All-hail!
15 His pinion, rapid runner, fans him on his way, as of a bird that hastens onward to its aim, And, as it were a faloon’s gliding through the air, strikes Dadhikravan’s side as he speeds on with might. All-hail!
16 Bless us the Coursers when we call, while slowly they move, strong singers, to the Gods’ assembly. Crushing’ the wolf, the serpent, and the demons, may they completely banish all affliction, All-hail!
17 May all those vigorous Coursers listen to our cry, hearers of invocation, speeders on their way ; Winners of thousands, fain to win where meed is won, who gather of themselves great wealth in every race.
18 Deep-skilled in Law Eternal, wise, immortal, O Coureers, help us in each fray for booty. Drink of this meatb, be satisfied, be joyful: then go on paths which Gods are wont to travel.
19 To me come plenteous growth of wealth! Approach me these, Heaven and Earth, who wear each form and figure! Hither may Father come to me, and Mother. Soma with immortality approach me !
20 To the Friend, Hail! To the Good Friend, Hail! To the Later-born, Hail! To Resolution, Hail ! To the Vasu, Hail! To the Lord of Days, Hail! To the Failing Day, Hail! To the Failing sprung from the Transitory, Hail! To the Transitory sprung from the Final, Hail! To the Final Mundane, Hail! To the Lord of the World, Hail! To the Sovran Lord, Hail! singers : or, perhaps, high-mettled. priestly fee. . This meath: & mese made of wildrice which the horses are made to smell before the race and to drink after it. See verse 9. wild-rice and recites the text. Father: Heaven, Mother: Earth; or per- hapa the Sacrificer’s parents are intended. makes the Sacrificer recive the following twelve formulas, one for each month, addressed to Prajapati as the Presiding Genius of the Year. The Priend: perhaps the first month after the winter solstice when the weather becomes milder, The Lord of Days: the month containing the longest day. The meaning of some of these fanciful expressions is obscure, and their applicability to the respective months is not apparent, Cf. XVILI. 28; XID 32. :
21 May life suceeed through sacrifice. May life-breath thrive by sacrifice. May the eye thrive by sacrifice. May the ear thrive by sacrifice. Yay the back thrive by sacrifice. May sacrifice thrive by sacrifice. We have become the children of Prajapati. Gods, we have gone to heaven. We have become immortal.
22 In us be your great might and manly vigour, in us be your intelligence and splendour. Obeisance to our Mother Earth! Obeisance to our Mother h! This is thy Sovranty. Thou art the ruler, thou art control- ler, thou art firm and stedfast. Thee for land-culture, thee for peace and quiet, thee for wealth, thee for increase of our substance.
23 Of old the furtherance of strength urged onward this Sovran Soma in the plants and waters. For us may they be stored with honey: stationed in front may we be watcbful in the kingdom. All-hail !
24 The fartherance of strength extended over this heaven and all the worlds as sovran ruler. He, knowing, makes the churl a bounteous giver: wealth may he grant us with full store of heroes. All-hail !
25 Surely the furtherance of strength pervaded all these exist- ing worlds in all directions, From olden time the King moves round, well knowing, strengthening all the people and our welfare.
26 As suppliants, for aid we grasp Soma the King, and Agni, the Adityas, Vishpu, Sdrya, aud the Brabman-priest Bribaspati.
27 Urge Aryaman to send us gifts, and Indra, and Brihaspati, Vak, Vishnu, and Sarasvati, and the strong Courser Savitar.
28 Agni, speak kindly to us here, be graciously inclined to us. Winner of thousands, gtant us boone, for thou art he who giveth wealth.
29 Let Aryaman vouchsafe us wealth, and Pishan, and Brihas- pati. Mey Vak the Goddess give to us, All-hail!
30 Thee by the radiant Savitar’s impulsion, with arms of Asvins, with the hands of Pfishan. To Vak Sarasvatt’s controlling guidance, hers the cofttrolling leader, I consign thee. I with Bribaspati’s supreme dominion endow thee by the balm of consecration.
31 With the monosyllable Agni won vital breath: may I win that. With the dissyllable the Agvins won bipeds: may I win those. With the trisyllable Vishnu won the three worlds: may I win those. With quadrisyllabic metre Soma won four-footed cattle : may I win those.
32 With five-syllable metre Pashan won the five regions: may I win them, With six-syllable metre Savitar won the six seasons : may I win them. With seven-syllable metre the Maruts won the seven domes- tic animals : May I win them. With octosyllabic metre Brihaspati won the Gayatri: may I win that.
33 With nine-eyllable metre Mitra won the Trivsit Stoma: may I win that, With decasyllabic metre Varuna won Viraj : may I win that. stituted for Vata the Wind-God. for Bhaga the Distributor of food or wealth. with the remainder of the sacrificial elements. J endow thee: addressing him by his name. offers oblations, or make the Sacrifoor recite the Usitis or Victory. Formulas. Monosyllable: metre of one syllable. Six Seasons: Spring, anne ‘Raine, Aw Autumn, Winter, Dews. IL 82. The Hymns of the Atharva-veda, II. $4.1, note; IIL. 10. 6 and note.
83 Trivrit Stoma : Tripl ele Pislee Bont 2 recitation in which first the first three verses of each triplet of R. V. 1X. 11 are sung together, then the econd verses, and lastly the third, With hendecasyllabic metre Indra won Trishtup: may I win that, With dodecasyllabie metre the All-Gods won Jagatt : may I win that.
84 The Vasus by thirteen-syllable metre won the Thirteenfold Stoma: may I win that. The Rudras by fourteen-syllable metre won the fourteenfold Stoma: may I win that. The Adityas with fifteen-syllable metre won the Fifteenfold Stoma : may I win that. Aditi with sixteen-syllable metre won the Sixteenfold Stoma: may I win that. Prajapati with seventeenfold metre won the Seventeenfold Stoma : may I win that. To re ee guide is Agni, to the eastward-seated Gods, All-hail! To Gods whose guide is Yama, to the southward-seated Gods, All-hail ! To Gods whose guides are the AlJ-Gods, those who are seated weatward, Hail ! Hail to the northward-seated Gods, to those whose guides are Mitra and Varuna or the Marut host ! To oa whose guide is Soma, who, worshipful, sit on high, All-bail!
36 Goda who have Agni as their guide, whose seat is eastward, Hail to them! Gods who have Yama as their guide, whose seat is southward, Hail to them ! Gods who have All-Gods as their guides, whose seat is west- ward, Hail to them ! Gods who have Mitra-Varana for guides, north-seated, Hail to them ! Gods who have Soma as their guide, high-seated, worshipful, Hail to them!
37 Agni, subdue opposing bands and drive our enemies away. Invincible, slay godless foes: give splendour to the worshipper.
38 Thee at the radiant Savitar’s impulsion, with Asvins’ arms and with the hands of Pashan, I offer with the strength of the Upamsu. Slain is the demon brood. All-hail ! Thee for the slaughter of the brood of demons. The demons have we slain, have lain. So-and-So, So-and-So is slain.
39 Savitar quicken thee for sway of rulers, Agni of householders, of the trees Soma, Brihaspati of Speech, for lordship Indra, Rudra for cattle, Mitra for true-speaking, Varuna for the sway of Law's protectors.
