2 One. only doing Karma here, should wisb to live a hundred
ears, No way is there for thee but this. So Karma oleaveth not to man.
3 Aye, to the Asuras belong those worlds enwrapt in blinding gloom. To them, when life on earth is done, depart the men who kill the Self. ‘This. the last AdbyAya or Book of the White Yajurveda Samhita, ia an Upanishad or religious and philosophical trentive, uot directly connected h any sacrificial ceremonial. It ‘ie professedly designed’, sxye Profesxe Weber, ‘to fix the proper mean between those exolnaively engaged in saeri- ficinl acta and those entirely neglecting them. It belongs at all events toa very advanced stage of speculation as it assumes a Lord (ty) of the universe. According to Mahtdhara's commentary, ite polemic ia directed partially against the Banddiias, that is. probably, against the doctrines which atte wards were called Simpkhya’.—History of Indian Literature, p. 108, most Self—the only Absolute Reality. This AU: the phenomenal universe. On earth: inthe three worlds; in the whole imaginary Coauos, TWidh thut renounced: after absolute renunciation of the world snd all the vain desires counccted with it. Enjoy thyself: delight in the blivs of the Beati- fic Vision. According to Sri Sabkara, or protect the Self. Coret no wealth: and set vot thy heart npon what thou callest thine, The seeming
4 Motionless, ons, swifter than Mind—the Devas failed to o’ertake it speeding on before them. It, standing still, outatrips the others running. Herein doth Matarigvan atablish Action,
5 It moveth; it is motionless, It is far distant ; it is near. It is within This All; and it surrounds This All externally.
6 The man who in his Self beholds all creatures and all things that be, And in ali beings sees his Self, thenee doubts no longer, What wilderment, what grief is there in him who sees the One alone?
8 He hath attained unto the Bright, Bodiless, Woundless, Sinewless, the Pure which evil hath not pierced. Far-sighted, wise, encompassing, he self-existent hath pres cribed aims, as propriety demands, uato the everlasting Years.
9 Deep into shade of blinding gloom fall Asambhiti’s wor- shippers. . They sink to. darkness deeper yet who.on Sambhiti are intent.
10 One fruit, they say, from Sambhava, another from Asambhava. Thus from the sages have we heard who have declared this bre to us,
11 The man who knows Sambhati and Vinisa sirauttaneonaly, He, by Vindga passing death, gains by Sambbiti endless lise Brahma. the Highest Essence, the Supreme Being. Sci Saikara differently : He’the Atma) encompassed or pervaded all, being bright, ete, thus putting thee neuter a/jectives in apposition to the masculine pronous azh (he). Malitdlara also gives this alternative explanation. Fur-aighted, etc,: referring either to the man who knows, or to the Atm4, according to the preferred interretation of the first tte of aire Ae mands: go-that every living being might receive the proper action, Years: Projtimtis or Creative "Powers, Prajtpsti boing ideatided with the Year, of which le is the Presiding Genius. See IX. 20; XXVIL 4 their separate worship is coademned. Asambhdti is, according to Set kara. undeveloped Prakriti, Jature in its causal or germinal state when it has not evolved as the universe which is the effect. It is alao-callud tamat, darkness or chaos. This worsh’p is mere blindness and ignorance, and its adherents fall into corresponding, darkness. Sambidti: explained by St Sabkara as the manifestation of Braama as Brahm the pheaomenal ereatar, called Niranyagarbha the Golden Germ, or Prajij ‘See R.V. X. 321. According to Mahtdhara’s first explanation, Asambhuti is the denial of a new birth or existence after death, and. Sambh iti is the exclusive assertion that belief, devotion to which will produce excess in the practice of Karma bined worship of Undeveloped Nature and Hiranyagurbha in order to teach their combination, having firet condemued the cults practised separately. From Sambhava : from the cult of Sambhava which is the same as Saabhuti in verse 9, or Hiranyagarbha, dsambhava: Undeveloped Nature or Asam- Dhiti, ‘The result of the former cult is the attainment of certain superne tural powers called Siddhis which enable their possessor to inerease or re- duce his size and weight to any extent at his pleasure, ete. Eight of thea ficulties are usually enumerated. The worship of Prakriti reaulta in al tion into Prakriti. Each, therefore, fails to attain the object to be rediutegration in the Supreme Self.
11 Sambhati: standing for Asambhtti, say the Commentators, by aphae- resis, and so mening Undeveloped Nature. Vin tea: (Destruction) that i
12 To blinding darkness go the men who make a cult of Nescience. The devotees of Science enter darkness that is darker still.
13 Different is the fruit, they say, of Science and of Nescience. ‘Thus from the sages have we heard who have declared this lore to us.
14 The man who knoweth well these two, Science and Nescience, combined, Overcoming death by Nescience by Science gaineth endless life.
15 My breath reach everlasting Air! In ashes let my body end. Ox! Mind, remember thou; remember thou my sphere ; remember thou my deeds,
16 By goodly path lead’ us to riches, Agni, thou God who kuowest all our works and wisdom, Remove the sin that makes us stray and wander: moet ample adoration will we bring thee.
