By impulse of God Savitar [take thee, eto. Spare art thou, Womau art thon, etc., as in XI. 9, 10,
3 0 Heaven and Barth divine, may [duly prepare for you
3 0 Heaven and Barth divine, may [duly prepare for you this day the head of Makhu on the place of earth where the Gods sncrificed. For Makha thee, thee for the head of Makha !
4 Ye who were born the earliest of creation, Auts divine, may I duly prepare for you this day the head of Makha on the place of earth where the Gods sacrificed. . For Makha thee, thee for the head of Makha! This Book and the two that follow contain the formulas to be used at the actual performance of the Pravargya ceremony, when the necessary auimals, vessels, and implements have been brought to the sacrificial ground, and the propitiatory texts (Book XXXVI) have been recited by the priests. to form two square beds for the chief Caldron, called Mahavira and Gharwa, to rext on, Woman: abhri, spade, being feminine : see V. 22. note. of which represents the vapoury heaven, and the earthy portion the earth, The head of Makhu: according to the legend related in the 8 itapatha and Pafichavimga Brahmanas, Makha (who appears as a malignant demon in R. V. 1X. 101, 13 and perhaps X. 171. 2) was attending a sacrificial session with Agni, Indra and other Gods who agreed to share among them any glory that should accrue from it. The glory came to Makha who took it and was giving to depart, Lut the Gods surronuded him and claimed their shares. He stood leaning on his bow when the string (gnawed through by confeder- ate ants, according to the §. Bralmana) gave way, and the bow-end, springing upwards, cut off his head. This head, replaced by the Agvins, Vecame the Pravargya, and when men offer this sacrifice they replace the head of Makba. See Muir, 0, Sanskrit Texts, 1V. pp. 124-129. Malt- dhura, however, without allusion to this legend (which is somewhat differ- ently related in the two Brahmanas), explains makha by yujita. sacrifice, the heud, or main essential of which is the Mahavira or chief caldron con- taining the heated milk.
5 Only so large was it at first. Duly may I prepare for you this day the head of Makha on earth’s place where the Gods sacrificed. For Muakha thee, thee for the head of Makha !
6 Indra’s effective might are ye. Duly may I prepare for you this day the head of Makba on earth’s place where the Gods sacrificed. For Makba thee, thee for the head of Makha ! For Makha thee, thee for the head of Makha! For Makha thee, thee for the head of Makha !
7 May Brahmanaspati draw nigh, etc., as in XXXII. 89. For Makha thee, thee for the head of Makha, eto., as in verse 6,
8 Thou art the head of Makha. Thee for Makha, thee for Makha’s head! Thou art the head of Makha, Thee for Makha, thee for Makha’s head! Thou art the head of Makha, thee for Makha, thee for Makha’s head ! For Makha thee, thee for the head of Makha, etc., as in, verse 6,
9 Thee on Gods’ sacrificial ground with stallion’s dung I fumigate. For Makha thee, thee for the bead of Makha | For Makha thee, thee for the head of Makha! For Makbs thee, thee for the head of Makha! For Makha thee, thee for the head of Makha !
10 Thee for the True, Thee for the Good. Thee for the place of happy rest. : nation, the sacrificial milk, and as substitutes for Soma planta when these are net at hand ; a kind of grase, according to Mahidhura, Thee: the milk which’ he lays down on the antelope skin, go to the Parivrit, an enclosed shed or shrine, where he deposits the sseri- ficial apparatus, the most important of which is the Mahavira or chist caldrou, two inferior caldrons being kept in reserve, ‘Thee: he addresses the chief Muhavira. with the formula. True: raise thee, the first Muhavira, to gratify the truthful Sun. The {for the Good ; the second to please Vayu. Thee for the place of happy rea: tthe third to plense Earth. For Mukha, ete.: he sprinkles the three viras with goat's mill, addréasing a formula to each, For Makha thee, thee for the head of Makha! For Makha thee, thee for the head of Makha! For Makha thee, thee for the head of Makha !
11 For Yama thee. For Makha thee. For Sirya’s fervent ardour thee. May Savitar the God with balm anoint thee. Guard thou the touches of the earth Flame art thou; thou art radiance ; thou art heat.
12 Unconquerable, eastward, in Agni’s overlordship, give me life. Rich in sons, southward, in Indra’s overlordship give me offspring. Fair-seated, westward, in God Savi me sight. Range of hearing, northward, in Dhatar’s overlordship, give me increase of wealth. Arrangement, upward, in Bribaspati’s overlordship, give me energy. From ali destructive spirits guard us. Thou art Mann’s mare.
13 All-hail! By Maruts be thou compassed round. Guard the sky’s touches. Mead, mead, mead,
14 Germ of the Gods, Father of hymns, all living creatures’ guardian Lord, Radiant, with radiant Savitar united, with the Sun he shines.
15 Agni combined with flaming fire, combined with Savitar divine, hath shone together with the Sun,
16 He shines on earth upholder of the sky and heat, the Gods’ upholder, God, immortal, born of heat. To him address » speech devoted to the Gods.
17 I saw the Herdsman, him who never stumbles, approachiug by his pathways and departing. He, clothed with gathered and diffusive splendout, within the worlds continually travels.
18 Lord of ull earths, Lord of all mind, Lord of all speech, thou Lord of speech entire. Heard by the Gods, Caldron divine, do thou, a God, protect the Gods. Horeuense let it speed you twain on to the banquet of the Gods. Sweetness for both the sweetness-lovers! Sweetness for those the twain who take delight in sweetness !
19 Thee for the heart, thee for the mind, thee for the sky, for Sirya thee. Standing) erect lay thou the sacrifice in heaven among the ods.
20 Thou art our Father, father-like regard us, Obeisance be to thee. Do not thou harm us. May we, accompanied by 'I'vasbtar, win thee. Vouchsafo me sons and cattle, Grant us offspring. Safe may I be to- gether with my husbund.
