2 To the Quarters Svaha ! To the Moon Svah&! To the Stars
Svaha! To the Waters Svaha! To Varuna Svaha! To the Navel Svaha! To the Purified Svaha !
3 To Speech Svéha! To Breath Svaha! To Breath Svabé! To Sight Svaha! To Sight Svah§! To Heuring Svaha ! To Hearing Svaha |
4 The wish and purpose of the mind and truth of speech nay T obtain, Bestowed on me be gattk’s form, sweet taste of food, and fame and grace. Syiha!
5 Prajapati while in preparation ; Samraj when prepared ; All-Gods’ when seated ; Ghaima when heated with fire; Splendour when lifted up; the Asvins’ while milk is poured in; Pashau's when the butter trickles down it ; the Maruts’ when the milk is clotting ; Mitra’s when the milk’s skin is sprending ; Vayu’s when it is carried off; Agni’s while offered as oblatiun ; Yak when it bas becn offered,
6 Savitar on the first day ; Agni on the second ; Vayn on the third; Aditya (the Sun) on the fourth; Chandramas (the Moon) on the fifth; Ritu on the sixth; the Maruts on the seventh ; Brihasputi on the eighth; Mitra on the niuth ; Varyna on the tenth ; Indra an the eleventh; the All-Gods on the twelfth.
7 Fierce; Terrible; The Resonaut ; The Roarer ; Victorious; Assailant ; and Dispeller. Svaha. ' 8 Agui with the heart; Lightning with the heart's point; Pagupati with the whole heart; Bhava with the liver. Sarva with the two cardiac bones; {sina with Passion; Mahadeva with the intercostal flesh ; the Fierce God with the rectum ; Vasishtha-hanuh, Singis with two lumps of flesh near the heart.
9 The Fierce with blood ; Mitra with obedience, Rudra with disobedience ; Indra” with pastime; the Maruts with strength ; the Sadhyas with enjoyment. Bhava’s is what is on the throat ; Rudra’s what is between the ribs; Mahadeva’s is the liver 3 Sarva’s the rectum; : Pagupati’s the pericardium.
10 To the hair Svaha! To the tair Svaha! To the skin Svabi! To the skin Svah&! To the bloud Svah&! To the blood Svahi! To the fats Svahd! To the fats SvabA! To the : fleshy parts Svihi! To the fleshy parts Svabi! To the | sinews Svaha! To the sinews Svah&! Svaha to the bone! Svaba to the bones! To the marrows Svab&! To the , matrows Svaha! To the seed Svaha! To the anus Svahi! forest, contains the names of seven of the fiercest Maruts, See XVIL &l— 85, from the last line of which the formula is repeated. of Beasts or Cattle, a title of Rudra who is called also Bhava and See XVI. 28. Cardiac bones : or, according to some, kidneys. See XIX. 85; XXV. 8. Pydna: Lord; Ruler; also one of the older names of Rudra. 8a {1 A. V. XV. 5. Mahddeva: the Great God; Rudra, Vasiatha-hanuh, Sings: |i nothing can be made out of the text which appears to be corrupt, understood. Sddhyas : a class of ancient deities ; Blessed Gods : Eggeling.
10 The object of the Pravargya, which is a purificatory and introductory + ceremony like Diksha or Consecration (IV. 2; V. 6) is the bodily regeut ration of the Sacrificer, the provision of a heavenly body with which alos he is permitted to enter the residence of the Gods (Haug, Ait Brik manam, IL 42, note). At the conclusion of the ceremony, therefore, the ! sacrificial materials are so arranged as to form the semblance of a hua figure. The Mahaviras represent the head ; the Prastara or sacrificial but of gras the hair ; the two milk-veszels are his eara ; the plates of gold and silver his eyes ; the Raubipacake potsherds represent the heels ; the cot tents of the caldron are the blood, and so on (see Hillebrandt, Ritual-Lit teratur, p.185), The formulas contained in this verve provide the Pravargyt man with the bodily parts enymerated, and the regeneration of the Secrif cer is thus completed, Faculties and feelings are imparted by the formals which follow. VERSE 13.) W4ITE YAJURVEDA. 308
11 To Effort Svaha! To Exertion Svaha! To Endeavour Svaba! To Viydsa Svahi! To Attempt Svaha !
12 To Grief Svah&! To the Grieving Svaha ! To the Sorrowing Svaba ! ‘To Sorrow Svahé | To Heat Svah&! To him who grows hot Svahi! To-him who is being heated Svaba! ‘To him who has been heated Svab’ ! To Gharmu Svaba! To Atonement Svabi! To Expiation Svaha! To Remedy Svaba !
