Taku upon a base art thou. Thee for the Adityas. Here, O Far-striding Vishnu, is thy Soma, Guard it from injury. Let them not harm thee.
worshipper. : But now, O Liberal Lord, thy bounty as a God is poured forth ever more and more, Thee for the Adityas.
3 Never art thou neglectful: thou guardest both races with thy care. The Soma feast, O Fourth Aditya, is thy strength. Amrit is atablished in the heavens. Thee for the Adityaa. .
4 The sacrifice obtains the Gods’ acceptance. Be graciously “inclined to us, Adityas. Hitherward let your favour be directed and be our best de- liverer from trouble. Thee for the Adityas. ~
5 This is thy Soma draught, O bright Aditya: take delight therein, oes To this mine utterance, O ye men, give credence, what good the man and wife obtain by praying: A manly son is burn and gathers riches, and thrives for.ever sinless in the dwelling.
6 Fair wealth, O Savitar, to-day, to-morrow, fair wealth pro- duce for us each day that passes. + May we, through this our song, be happy gainers, God! of @ fair and spacious habitation.
7 Taken upon a base art thou. Savitar’s giver of delight art thou. Giver of joy art thou: vouchsafe me joy. Speed thou the sacrifice, speed thou the sacrifice’s lord to win his share. Thee for the God, for Savitar. ‘8 Taken upon a base art thou. Thou art a good protector, firmly stablished. To the Great Bull be reverential homage. ‘Thee for the Vigvedevas. This is thy home: Thee for the Vigvedevas.
9 Taken upon a base art thou. May it be mine to prosper the libations of thee Brihaspati’s son, O radiant Soma, of thee, strong Indu, mated with thy Consorts, I am in heaven above, on earth beneath it. The intermedi- ate, region was my father. I saw the Sun both from above and under. I am what Gods’ in secret hold the highest.
10 Agni, associate with the Dames, accordant with the God Tvashtar, drink. All-hail ! Thou art Prajépati, strong male, impregner: may I obtain from thee, strong male, i impregner, a son who shall him- self become a father, Thou art bay-coloured, Yoker of Bay Coursers, Thee for the pair of tawny-coloured horses. United with the Soma, ye, for Indra, are corn for his two . __ tawny steeds to feed on,
12 That draught of thine which winneth cows or horses, offered with sacrificial text and lauded With chanted hymns and songs of adoration—of that per- mitted do I take permitted,
13 Of sin against the Gods thou art atonement. of sin against mankind thou art atonement. For sin against the Fathers thou atonest. Of sin against oneself thou art atonement. Of every sort of sin thou art atonement. The sin that I have knowingly committed, the sin that unawares I have committed, of all that wickedness thou art the atonement.
14 We with our bodies have again united, with lustre, vital sap, and happy spirit. Giver of boons, may Tvashtar grant us riches and smooth whate’er was injured in our body.
15 Lead us with thought to wealth in kine, O Indra, to princes, Lord of Bounty ! and to welfare. Lead thou us on to God-inspired devotion, to favour of the Gods who merit worship. All-hail !
16 Verse 14 repeated.
17 May this please Savitar and liberal Dhtar, Prajépati the Treasure-Guard, bright Agni, Tvashtar, and Vishnu : bleasing him with children, grant store of riches to the Sacrificer.
18 Gods, we have made your seats easy of access, who, pleased with us, have come to this libation. Bearing and bringing hitherward your treasures, grant to this man, good Lords, abundant riches. All-hail!
19 The willing Gods whom, God, thou hast brought hither, send them to their own dwelling-place, O Agni, As all of you have eaten and have drunken, approach the air, the heat, the light of heaven. "38 Thou: a splinter of the Sscrifcial Stake. Six of those splinters are thrown on the fre and soverelly addreeoed with a formals. recite the text taken from A. V. VI. 53. 8.
115 He makes nine offerings callod Sarishtayajuses or final sacrificial texte and oblations, and with the firat he recites the text taken from R. V. V. 42. 4. Princes : wealthy sacrificers who will liberally reward our oblation. Liberal : or rdti may mean the Oblation personified. Dhdtar : the Creator, or Ordainer. Grant: ye, the Deities mentioned, VIL. 97.4. Easy of access: sacrifice leading the worshipper to heaven.
19 The fifth, with the text from A. V. VII. 97. 8. : the rice-cakes. Drunken: libations of Soma.
20 Here, Agni, as this sacrifice proceedeth, have we elected thee to be our Hotar. Special have been thine offerings and thy labour. Well knowing sacrifice, as sage, come near us.
21 Do ye, O Gods, discoverers of the Pathway, go forward on the path when ye have found it. O God, thou Lord and Master of the Spirit, bestow—All- hail !—this sacrifice on Vata.
22 Go, Sacrifice, to the sacrifice: seek thou the sacrifice’s lord, seek thine own home. All-hail ! Lord of the sacrifice, this is thy sacrifice, followed by many heroes, loud with hymns of praise. Accept it.thou. All- hail!
23 Become no serpent thou, become no viper. King Varuna hath made a spacious pathway, a pathway for the Sun wherein to travel. Where no way was he made him set his footstep, and warn- ed afar whate’er afflicts the spirit. To Varuna be reverential homage! Varuna’s noose beneath our feet is trampled.
24 The waters, face of Agni, have I entered, O Waters’ Child, repelling evil spirits. Offer the fuel in each home, O Agni. Let thy tongue dart
25 Thy heart is in the flood, within the waters, With thee let plants and waters be commingled, That, Lord of Sacrifice, we may adore thee with singing praise and telling forth our homage. All-hail!
26 This, O celestial Waters, is your offspring. Sree him dearly loved and gently nurtured. This ie thy station, O celestial Soma ; therein bring happiness and ward off evil.
27 O restless Purifying Bath, thou glidest onward restlessly. May I with aid of Gods remove thé stain of sin against the Gods, and wash away with mortals’ help the wrong that hath been done to men. Preserve me, God, from injury, from the loud-roaring demon foe. Thou art the fuel of the Gods.
28 Let, still unborn, the ten-month calf move with the follow- ing after-birth. Even as the wind is moving, as the gathered flood of ocean moves, So may this ten-month calf come forth together with the after-birth. :
29 O thou who hast a womb of gold and offspring meet for sacrifice, Him with all limbs unbroken have I brought together with his dam, All-hail!
30 Multiform, rich in wondrous operation, the strong juice hath enrobed itself with greatuess, Let the worlds praise her uniped and biped, thtee-footed and four-footed and eight-fuoted. All-bail !
31 Verily, best of guardians hath he in whose dwelling-place ye drink, O Maruts, giants of the sky. 5
32 May Heaven and Earth, the Mighty Pair, besprinkle this our savrifice, And feed us full with nourishments,
33 Slayer of Vritra, mount thy car: thy Bay Steeds have been yoked by prayer. May, with its voice, the pressing-stoue draw thine attention hitherward. Taken upon a base art thou. For Indra thee, for Shodasf. This is a dwelling-place for thee. For Indra thee, for Shodast.
34 Harness thy air of strong Bay Steeds, long-maned, whose e bodies fi girths, And, Indra, Soma-drinker, eome to listen to our songs of raise. en upon @ base, etc., as in 33,
35 His pair of tawny Coursers bring Indra of unresisted might Hither to Rishis’ songe of praise and sacrifice performed by men. Taken upon a base, etc., as in 33,
36 Than whom there is none other born more mighty, who hath pervaded all existing creatures— Prajapati, rejoicing in his offspring, he, Shodasi, maintains the three great lustres.
37 Indra chief Lord and Varuna the Sovran have made this draught of thine the first and foremost. I, after, drink their draught. May she, the Goddess of Speech, rejoicing, eate herself with Soma—aAll-hail !—with Prana as her feast-companion.
38 Skilled in thy task, O Agni, pour lustre and hero strength on us, Granting me wealth and affluence. ‘Taken upon a base art thou. For Agni thee, for splendour. This is thy home. For Agni thee, for splendour. Thou, lustrous Agni, mid the Gods art splendid. May I ameng mankind be bright with lustre. fold, of sixteon-hymned) libation to Indra who is called Shodast as connected with this service. The libation is drawn at the Morning-Pressing in a four- cornered cup of Khadira wood, with the text from R. V. I. 84. 3.
85 Or a third text from R.V. 1. 84. 2. Vayu, 90 a, or Fire, Wind, and Sun. y'He deiaks the cup. The Goddess of Speech : Sarasvatl. Prona:; the Genius of Vital Breath.
88 Formulas for the or Twelve-Day Ceremonial, of which the Prishthyashadaha, period of six sacrificial days, forms part. On the first three days of this périod the three Atigrtbyes (Additional or Superiority Cups) are drawn with appropriate texts for Indra, Agni, and Sirys, The first cup is for Agni, with the text in Gayatr! from R. V. IX. 66, 21. 5 drunk . The Soma which the mortar pressed. Taken upon a base art thou. For Indra thee, for mighty strength. This is thy home. For Indra thee, for might. Among the Gods thou art the mightiest, Indra. Among mankind I fain would be most mighty. men, Like flames of fire that burn and blaze. Taken upon a base art thou. For Stirya, for the Bright One, thee. This is thy home. For Sarye, for the Bright One, thee. Thou among Gods art brightest, brightest Sarya. Among : mankind I fain would be the brightest.
41 His herald rays bear him aloft, the God who knoweth all that lives, Sdrya, that all may look at him. Taken upon a base, etc., as in 40.
42 Smell thou the vat. Let Soma drops pass into thee, O Mighty One. + Return again with store of sap. Pour for us wealth im thou- sands thou with full broad streams and floods of milk. Let riches come again to me.
43 Id&, delightful, worshipful, loveable, splendid, shining One, Inviolable, full of sap, the Mighty One, most glorious, These are thy names, 0 Cow: tell thou the Gods that I act righteously.
44 OIndra, beat our foes away, humble the men who challenge us: Send down to nether darkness him who seeks to do us injury. Takeu upon a base art thou. For Indra, foe-dispeller, thee. This is thy home. For Indra, foe-dispeller, thee.
45 Let us invoke to-day, to aid our labour, the Lord of Speech, the thought-swift Visvakarman. May he hear kindly all our invocations, who gives all bliss for aid, whose works are righteous. Taken upon a base art thou. For Indra Visvakarman thee. This is thy home. For Indra Vigvakarman thee.
46 With strengthening libation, Visvakarman, thou madest Indra an undying guardian. ‘The people of old time bowed down before him because the Mighty One was meet for worship. Taken upon a base, etc., as in 45.
47 Taken upon a base art thou. . I take thee lord of Gayatri for Agni. For Indra take I thee the lord of Trishtup. I take thee lord of Jagatt for All-Gods. Anushtup is the song that sings thy praises.
48 I stir thee for the fall of cloud-borne waters. I stir thee for the fall of streams that gurgle. I stir thee for the fall of those that gladden. I atir thee for their fall who are most lovely. I atir thee for their fall that are. the sweetest. I stir thee for the waters’ fall, I stir thee, pure one, in the pure, in the day’s form, in Sfirya’s beams.
49 The Bull’s majestic form is shining brightly, the pure the pure's preceder, Soma Soma’s. Whatever name invincible, stimulating, is thine, O Soma, for that name I take thee. All-bail to Soma, unto thee, O Soma.
55 As Indra aud the Maruts he is stationed ready for the sal Asura, being bought and sold. Mitra when purchased ; Vishno Sipivishta when on the Sacrificer’s thigh he resteth ; Vishnu Narandhisha brought on the barrow ;
56 Soma when come: when seated on the platform, Varuna; Agni in the sacred fire-place ; Indra upon the sacrificial barrow; Atharvan when deposited for pounding ;
57 All-Gods when offered in the scattered fragments; Vishnu, the guard of those who soothe his anger, when he is filled and swelling in the waters; Yama in pressing ; Vishnu vi in calications yee A ‘ayu what time they cleanse and pr him; the Bright when cleansed ; the Bright with ie about him; i thin commingled with the meal of barley ;
58 All-Gods when he is drawn away in beakers; Life when up- lifted for the fire-oblation; Budra when offered; Vata when reverted; Man-viewer when beheld ; drink when they drink him ; deposited, the Narieamsa Fathers;
59 Sindhu when ready for the bath that cleanses; the sea when he is carried to the waters; Water is he when he is plunged beneath it. To those most mighty hath it gone, most manly in vigour, by whose strength the worlds were stablished, Who rule as Lords resistless in their grandeur, Vishnu and Varuna, at the prayer of morning.
60 To Gods, to sky the sacrifice hath gone: come riches thence to me! To men, to air the sacrifice hath gone : come riches thence to me! To Fathers, earth, the sacrifice hath gone: come riches thence to me! Whatever sphere the sacrifice hath reached, may wealth come thence to me.
61 The threads that have been spun, the four-and-thirty, which stablish this our sacrifice with Svadba, Of these I join together what is broken, All-hail! to Gods go the warm milk oblation ! .
62 Spread far and wide is sacrifice’s milking: eightfold along the heaven hath it extended. Pour, Sacrifice! in plenty on mine offspring: may I obtain prosperity for ever. All-hail !
