2 O Agni, may these bricks be mine own milch kine : one, and
ten, and ten tens, a hundred, and ten hundreds. a thou- sand, and tev thousand a myriad, and a hundred thousand, and a million, and a hundred millions, and an ocean mid- die and end, and a hundred thousand millions, aud a bil- lion, May these bricks be mine own milch-kine in yonder world and in this world.
3 Ye are the Seasons, strengthening Law, fixed iu due season, strengthening Law, Called Splendid, dropping butter down and honey, yielders of every wish, imperishable.
4 With the lake's mantling need we robe thee, Agni: to us be purifying and auspicious.
5 With cold’s investing garb we gird thee, Agni: to us be puri- fying and auspicious.
6 Descend upon the earth, the reed, the rivers: thou art the gall, O Agni, of the waters, With them come hither, female Frog, and render this sacri- fice of ours bright-hued, successful.
7 This is the place where waters meet ; here is the gathering of the flood. Let thy shaft buro others than us: be thou cleanser, pro- pitious unto us,
8 O Agni, purifier, God, with splendour and thy pleasant tongue Bring hither, and adore, the Gods.
9 So, Agni, purifying, bright, bring hither to our sacrifice, To our oblation bring the Gods.
10 He who with purifying, eye-attracting form hath shone up- on the earth as with the light of Dawn ; Who speeding on, as in the fleet steed’s race, in fight, cometh untouched by age, as one athirst in heat.
11 Obeisance to thy wrath and glow! Obeisance to thy fiery flame! Let thy shot missiles burn others than us: be thou cleanser, propitious unto us.
12 To him who dwells in man, Hail! To him who dwells in waters, Hail! To him who dwells in sacred grass, Hail! To him who dwells in the wood, Hail! To him who finds the light, Huil !
18 Worshipful Gods of Gods who merit worship, those who sit down beside their yearly portion, Let them who eat not sacrificial presents drink in this rite of honey and of butter.
14 Those Gods who have attained to Godhead over Gods, they who have led the way in this our holy work, Without whose aid no body whatsoever moves, not on heaven's heights are they, nor on the face of earth.
15 Giver of breath, of out-breath, breath diffusive, giver of lustre, giving room and freedom, Let thy shot missiles burn others than us : be thou cleanser, propitious unto us.
16 May Agni with his sharpened blaze cast down each fierce devouring fiend, May Agni win us wealth by war.
17 He who sate down as Hotar priest, the Rishi, our Father offering up all things existent— He, seeking with his wish a great possession, came among men on earth as archetypal,
18 What was the place whereon he took his station What was it that upheld him? What she manner, Whence Visvakarman, seeing all, producing the earth, with mighty power disclosed the heavens? Their offerings joy in rich juice where they value One, only One beyond the Seven Rishis.
27 Father who made us, he who, as Disposer, knoweth all races and all things existing, Even he alone, the Deities’ name-giver,—bim other beings seek for information,
28 To him in sacrifice they offered treasnres,—Rishis of old, in numerous troops, as singers, Who, in the distant, near, and lower region, made ready all these things that have existence.
29 That. which is earlier than this earth and heaven, before the Asuras and Gods had being,— What was the gerin primeval which the waters received where the first. Gods beheld each other?
30 The waters, they received that germ primeval wherein the Gods were gathered all together. It rested set upou the Unborn’s navel, that One wherein abide all things existing.
31 Ye will not find him who produced these creatures : another thing hath risen up among you. Enwrapt in misty cloud, with lips that stammer, bymo- chanters wander and are discontented.
32 First was the God engendered, Vigvakarman: then the Gandharva sprang to life as second. Third in snevession was the plants’ begetter: be haid the waters’ verm in many places.
33 Swift, rapidly striking, like a bull who sharpens bis horns, terrific, stirring up the people, With eyes that close not, bellowing, Sole Hero, Indra subdued at once a hundred armies.
34 With him loud-roaring, ever watchful, Victor, bold, hard to overthrow, Rouser of battle, Indra the Strong, whose hand bears arrows, conquer, ye warriors, now, now vanquish in the combat. 35. He rules with those who carry shafts and quivers, Indra who with his band brings hosts together, Fo:-conquering, strony of arm, the Soms-drinker, with mighty bow, shooting with well-laid arrows.
36 Brihaspati, fly with thy chariot hither, slayer of demons, driving off our foemen, Be thou protector of our cars, destroyer, victor in battle, breaker-up of armies.
37 Conspicuous by thy strength, firm, foremost fighter, mighty aud fierce, victorious, all-subduing, The Son of Conqnest, passing men and heroes, kine-winner, mount thy conquering car, O Indra.
38 Cleaver of stalls, kine-winner, armed with thunder, who quells amarmy and with might destroys it,— Follow him, brethers! quit yourselves like heroes, and like this Indra show your zeal and courage.
39 Piercing the cow-stulls with surpassiug vigour, Indra, the pitiless Hero, wild with anger, Victor in fight, uushaken aud resistless,—may he protect our armies in our batt
40 Indra yuide these: Brihaspati precede them, the guerdon, and the sacrifice, and Suma ; Aud let the banded Marts march in forefront of heaveuly hosts that conquer and demolish,
41 Ours be the potent host of mighty Indra, King Varuna, aud Maruts, and Adityas. Uplifted is the shout of Gods who conquer, high-minded Gods who cause the worlds to tremble.
42 Bristle thou up, O Bonnteous Lord, our weapons : excite the spirits of my warring heroes. Urge ow the strong steeds’ might, O Vritra-slayer, and let the din of congnering cars go upward.
43 May Indra aid us when our flags are gathered ; victorious be the arrows of our army. May our brave men of war prevail in battle. Ye Gods protect us in the shout of onset.
44 Bewildering the senses of our foemen, seize thou their bodies‘ and depart, O Apva. Attack them, set their hearts ou fire and burn them: so let our foes abide in utter darkness.
45 Loosed from the bowstring fly away, O Arrow, sharpened by our prayer, Go to the foemen, strike them home, and let not one of them escape.
46 Advance, O heroes, win the day. May Indra be your sure defence. Exceeding mighty be your arms, that nove may wound or injure you.
47 That army of our enemies, O Maruts, that comes against us with its might, centending, Meet ye and wrap it in unwelcome darkness so that not one of them may know another,
48 There where the flights of arrows fall like boys whose locks are yet unshorn, May Indra, may Bribaspati, may Aditi protect us well, pro- tect us well through all our days.
49 Thy vital parts I cover with thine armour: with immor- tality King Soma clothe thee. Varuna give thee what is more than ample, and in thy triumph may the Gods be joyful.
50 Worshipped with butter, Agni, lead this man to’ high pre- éminence. Vouchsafe him growth of riches and multiply him with progeuny.
44 Apvd : according to Sayana, a female deity who presides over sin; according to Mubtdhara, sickuess or fear. Apparently Apva was a sort uf colic, or dysentery, likely to attack soldiers in the field of battle, And de part: or, paws us by ; do not attack us,
45 Taken from R. V. VI. 75. 16.
46 Taken from R. V. X. 103. 13,
47 Taken from A. V. III. 2. and the following verse are taken from R. V. VL 75.17, 18 Like boys, ete. : ‘ the point of the comparison is not very obvious, but. it the arrows full where they list, as boys before they are left with the lock of hair, before the religions tonsure, play sbout wherever they like.’: Wilson. Prof. von Roth separates vigikhd from kumdrd, and translates : ‘where the arrows fly, young and old’: that is, feathered aud unfeathered,
49 Thy vital parts: the varman, or coat of mail, protected the shoulders back, chest, and lower parts of the body. If not ‘made of metal, it was strengthened with metal of eume kind, a He puts three logs of Udumbara wood on the fire, with a formule fop each.
51 Indra, lead him to eminence: controller of bis foes be he. Vouchsafe him lustre : let him give their sacred portions to the Gods,
52 The man within whose house we pay oblation, Indra, prosper him. May the Gods bless and comfort him, they and this Brab- manaspati.
53 May the All-Gods, O Agni, bear and Tift thee upward with their thoughts, Fair to be looked on, rich in light, be thou propitious unto us,
54 May the Five Regions guard, divine, our worship, Goddesses chasing lack of thought and hatred, Giving the Sacrificer growth of riches. Let sacrifice be based on growth of riches.
55 Inspirited above enkindled Agni, adorable, winged with hymns, was it accepted, When the Gods offered sacrifice with viands, circling the heated caldron, paying worship,
56 Lord of a hundred dranghts. benign, God-serving—-to him divine, establisher, protector, The Gods approached the sacrifice, encircling, Gods for the Gods stood fain for sacred service.
57 When the fourth sacrifice reaches the oblation, accepted offer- ing which hath been made ready, fit for the Imnolator’s sacrificing, Theuce bless us prayers and holy recitations !
58 Savitar, golden-hued, bath lifted eastward, bright with the sunbeams, his eternal lustre, He at whose furtherance wise Pishan marches surveying all existence like a herdsman.
59 He sits, the measurer, in the midst of heaven, fillmg the two world-halves and air’s mid-region. He looks upon the rich far-spreading pastures between the eastern and the western limit.
60 Steer, Sea, Red Bird with strong wings, he hath entered the dwelling-place of the Primeval Father. A gay-hued Stone set in the midst of heaven, he bath gone forth and guards the air’s two limits.
61 All sacred songs have glorified Indra expansive as the sea, The best of warriors borne on cars, the Lord, the Very Lord of strength.
62 May God-invoking sacrifice bring the Gods hitherward to us. May bless-invoking sacrifice bring the Gods hitherward to us May Agni, God, wake offering and hither bring the Gods to us.
63 May the abundant growth of wealth with elevation lift me Up; And with his subjugating power may Indra keep my foemen down.
64 Upraising and depreasion and devotion may the Gods increase. May Indra, too, and Agni drive my foes away to every side.
65 Go ye by Agui to the sky bearing the Ukhya in your hands. Reaching the heights of sky and heaven stay iutermingled with the Gods,
66 Agni, go forward to the eastern region, well-skilled, be here the fire in front of Agni. Ilaming all the quarters, shine with splendour : supply with food our quadrupeds and bipeds.
67 From earth to air’s mid-region have I mounted, and from mid-air ascended up to heaven. From the high pitch of heaven's cope I came into the world of light.
68 Mounting the sky they look not round: they rise to heaven through both the worlds— Sages who span the sacrifice tbat pours its stream on every side.
69 Foremost of those who seek the Gods come forward, thou who art eye of Gods and men, 0 Agni. Accordaut with the Bhrigus, faiu to worship, to heaven in safety go the Sacrificers.
70 Night and Dawn, different in hue, accordant, etc., asin XII. 2.
71 O Agni, thousand-eyed and hundred-hended, thy breaths are hundred, thy through-breatbs a thouxand. ‘Thou art the Lord of thousandfold possessions. To thee, for strength, may we present ublation.
72 Thon art the Bird of goodly wing : be seated on the ridge of earth. Fill air’s mid-region with thy glow, supporting with thy light the sky, confirm the quarters with thy sheen.
73 Receiving offerings, fair of aspect, eastward be duly seated in thy pluce, O Agui. In this the more exalted habitation be seated All-Gods and the Sacrificer.
74 That wondrous all-mankind-embracing favour of Savitar, choice-worthy, I solicit, Even his which Kanva wont to milk. the mighty, the teeming Cow who yields a thousand milk-streams,
75 May we adore thee in thy loftiest birth place, Agni! with praise-songs in thy lower station. ‘The place wheuce those hast issued forth I worship. In thee, well kindled, have they paid oblations youthful God, that never fadeth. Unceasing unto thee come sacred viands.
77 Agni, this day with lauds, ete., as in XV. 44.
78 I dedicate the thought with mind and butter so that the Gods may come who love oblation, strengthing Law, To Vigvakarman, Lord of all the earth, I offer up day after day the inviolable sacrifice.
79 Seven fuel logs hast thou, seven tongues, O Agni, seven Rishis hast thou, seven belovéd mansions. Seven-priests in sevenfold manner pay thee worship. Fill full—All-hail to thee !—seven wombs with butter.
80 Purely-Bright, Wonderfully-Bright, Really-Bright, All-Lu- minous, Bright, Law's-Protector, Safe-from-Ill ;
81 Such, Other-Looking, Equal, Similar, Measured, Commen- surate, Jointly-Bearing-up.
82 Right, Real, Firm, Strong-to-Support, Bearer, Disposer, Manager.
83 Winner-of-Right, Winner-of-Truth, Host-Conquering, Lord- of-Goodly-Host, Whose-Friends-are-Near-at-Hand, Whose-Banded-Enemies- are-Far-Away : the birthplace of Agni asthe Sun. Lower station: the firmament, where he is produced as lightning. The place whence thou hast issued: the fire- altar. R.V. IV. 10.1, ht: of the priests and the sacrificer. The metre is Atijagatt, four divisione of thirteen syllables each.
79 He offers a full oblation with the sruk or offering-spoon. Fuel said to be the vital breathings. Seven tongues ; called Kal Baral, etc. Ris Marichi end the rest. Seo XVII. 26. Mansions: Gayatri and other saor red metres, or the Ahavuntya, Garhapatya and other fire-hearths, Seves- fold faskion : with the Agnishtoma (Praise of Agni) and other services, ‘Wombs: layers of the altar.
80 After offering the Vaisvanara rice-cake to Agni the God of All Mes, he offers seven rice cakes to the Maruts (cor ing of three or nine troops of seven each) with a formula at each offering containing names or titles of these deities. .
84 To day in this our sacrifice be present, Such, Looking-Thus, Same, Similar-in-A pearance, Measured, Commensurate, Joint-Bearers, Maruts !
85 Self-Powerful, Voracious-One, Kiu-to-the-Sun, The House- holder, Play-Lover, Mighty, Conqueror. Fierce, Terrible, The Resonant, The Roaring, Victorious, Assailant, and Dispeller, All-Hail!
86 The Maruts, clans divine, became the followers of Indra ; as The Maruts, clans divine, became the followers of Indra, so May claus divine and human be the Sacrificer’s followers,
87 Drink in the middle of the flood, O Agui, this breast stored full of sap, teeming with water. Welcome this fountain redolent of sweetness. O Courser, enter those thy watery dwelling.
88 Oil hath been mixed : oil is his habitation. In oil he rests : oil is his proper province. Come as thy wont is. © thou Steer, rejoice thee. Bear off the oblation duly cousecrated.
89 Forth from the ocean sprang the wave of sweetness: together with the stalk it turned to Amrit, That which is holy oil’s mysterious title: but the Gods’ tongue is truly Amrit’s centre.
90 Let us Declare aloud the name of Ghrita, and at this sacrifice held it up with homage. So let the Brahman hear the praise we utter. This hath the four-horned Buffalo emitted.
91 Four are his horns, three are the feet that bear him : his heads are two, his bands are seven in number. Bound with a triple bond the Bull roars loudly: the mighty God hath entered iuto mortals,
92 That oil in triple shape the Gods discovered laid down with- in the Cow, concealed by Panis. Indra produced one shape, Sirya another : by their own power they formed the third from Vena.
93 From inmcst reservoir in countless channels flow down these rivers which the foe beholds not. I look upon the streams of oil descending, and Jo! the Golden Reed is there among them.
94 Like rivers our libations flow together, cleansing themselves in inmost beart aud spiri The streams of holy vil pour swiftly downward like the wild beusts that fly before the bowman,
95 As rushing down the rapids of a river, flow swifter than the wind the vigorous currents, ‘The streams of oil in swelling fluctuation like a red courser bursting through the fences.
96 Like women at a gathering fair to look on and gently smiling, they incline to Agni. ‘The streams of holy oil attain the fuel, and Jatavedas joyfully reeeives them,
97 As maidens deck themselves with gay adornment to join the bridal feast, I now behold them. ‘Where Soma flows and sacrifice is ready, thither the streams of boly oil are ranning.
98 Send to our eulogy a herd of cattle: bestow upon us cxcellent possessions. Bear to the Gods the sacrifice we offer: the streams of oil flow pure and full of sweetness.
