By impulse of God Savitar I take thee with arms of Agvins, with the hands of Pashan. Thou art a woman, Here I cut the necks of Rakshasas away. Barley art thou, Bar off from us our haters, bar our enemies. Thee for heaven, thee for earth, thee for the welkin, Pure be the worlds, the Fathers’ dwelling-places. Thou art the habitation of the Fathers.
this, It will stand upon thee. Savitar, God, anoint thee with sweet butter. Thee for the plants laden with goodly fruitage ! Thou with thy top hast touched the sky, hast with thy middle filled the air, and steadied with thy base the earth.
3 Those seats of thine which we desire to visit, where there are many-horned and nimble oxen, There, of a truth, was mightily imprinted the loftiest step of widely-striding Vishnu, I close thee in, the winner of the Brahmans, winner of Nobles and abundant riches. Strengthen the Brahmans, strengthen thou the Nobles, strengthen our vital power, strengthen our offspring.
4 Look ye on Vishnu’s works, whereby the Friend of Indra, close-allied, Hath let his holy ways be seen.
5 The princes evermore behold that loftiest place ‘where Viehnu is, Laid as it were an eye in heaven.
6 Thou art invested. Heavenly hosts invest thee! Riches of men invest this Sacriticer! Heaven’s son art thou. This is thine earthly station. Thine is the beast whose home is in the forest.
7 Encourager art thou. The hosts of heaven have come to yearning Gods, the best conductors, God Tvashtar, make the wealth of cattle quiet. Delightful to the taste be thine oblations,
8 Joy, wealthy ones! Brihaspati, save our riches. I bind thee with’ the noose of holy Order, thou offering to the Gods. Bold be the Slayer.
9 By impulse of God Savitar I bind thee, with arms of Asvins and with hands of Pdshan, thee welcome unto Agni and to Soma. Thee for the waters, thee for plants. Thy mother grant + thee permission, and thy futher, brother boru of one dam, thy friend, thy herd-companion. I aprinkle thee welcome to Agni-Soma.
10 Drinker art thou of water. May the Waters, the Goddesses, add sweetness to the oblation prepared for Gods, even though already sweetened. Invest, ye two, the heaven and earth with fatness. O Vayu, eagerly enjoy the droppings. Let Agni eagerly enjoy the butter. All-hail ! Go, both of yon, by Svah& consecrated, to Ordhvacabhas, offspring of the Maruts,
17 Ye Waters, wash away this stain and whatsoever taint be here, Each sinful act that I have done, and every harmless curse of mine. May Waters rid me of that guilt, and Pavamana set me free.
18 Be they united, with the Mind thy mind, and with the Breath thy breath. Thou quiverest. Let Agni washed together all thy juice Thee for the Wind’s rush, for the speed of Pishan. From heated vapour may it reel and totter,—the disconcerted hatred of our foemen.
19 Ye drinkers-up of fatness, drink the fatness ; drink up the gravy, drinkers of the gravy! Thou art the oblation of the air’s mid-region. All-hail! The regions, the fore-regions, the by-regions, the intermediate and the upper regions,—to all the regions Hail!
20 In every limb is Indra’s out-breath seated, in every limb is Indra’s in-breath settled. God Tvashtar, let thine ample forms be blended, that what wears different shapes may be one-fashioned. To please thee let thy friends, mother and father, joy over thee as to the Gods thou goest.
21 Go tothe sea. All-hail! Go to theair. All-hail! Go to God Savitar, All-hail! . Go thou to Mitra-Varuns, All-hail! Go thou to Day and Night. All-hail! Go to the Metres. All-hail! Go to Heaven and Earth. All- hail! Go to the sacrifice. All-hail! Go to Soma. All- hail! Go to the heavenly ether. All-hail! Go to Vaigva- nara Agni, All-hail! Bestow upon me mind and heart. Thy smoke mouut to the sky, to heaven thy lustre. Fill thou the spacious earth full with thine ashes,
22 Harm not the Waters, do the Plants no damage. From every place, King Varuna, thence save us. gd saying that we swear our oath by sacred cows, by an TUpa, O Varuna, save us therefrom. To us let Waters and let Plants be friendly; to him who hates us, whom we hate, unfriendly.
23 These waters teem with sacred food: rich in that food, ove longs for them. Rich be the holy rite therein. In sacred food be Sdrya rich.
24 I set you down in Agni’s seat whose home is indestructible. Indra-and-Agni’s share are ye, Mitra-and-Varuna’s share are ye. The share of all the Gods are ye. May waters gathered near the Sun, and those wherewith the Sun is joined, Speed on this sacred rite of ours.
25 Thee for the heart, thee for the mind, thee for the heaven, thee for the Sun. Bear up erect to heaven, to Gods, this rite, these sacrificial calls.
26 Descend, O Soma, King, to all thy people. Down, unto thee, go, one and all, thy people ! May Agni with his fuel hear my calling. Hear it the Waters and the Bowls, Divine Ones! Hear, Stones, as knowing sacrifice, my calling. May the God Savitar hear mine invocation.’ All-hail!
27 Waters Divine, your wave, the Waters’ offspring, fit for ob- lation, potent, most delightful— Upon those Gods among the Gods bestow it, who drink the pure, of whom ye are the portion. All-hail!
28 Drawing art thou: I draw thee up that Ocean ne'er may waste or wane. Let waters with the waters, and the plants commingle with the plants.
29 That man is lord of endless strength whom thou protectest in the fight, Agni, or urgest to the fray.
30 By impulse of God Savitar I take thee with arms of Asvins, with the hands of Pashan, Free with thy gifts‘art thou. Perform for Indra this deep, most excellently ordered worship, With the most noble bolt I pay the worship enriched with strengthening food and milk and sweetness. Ye are Nigrébby& waters, heard by Deities: make me con- tent.
31 Content my mind, content my speech, content my breath, content mine eye, content mine ear, content my soul, con- tent my progeny, content my herds, content the troops of men about me: never may the bands of men about me suffer thirst.
32 For Indra girt by Vasus and accompanied by Rudras, thee. For Indra with Adityas, thee. For Indra foe-destroyer, thee. Thee for the Soma-bringing Hawk. For plenty- giving Agni, thee.
33 Soma, what light there is of thine in heaven, what on the earth, what in mid-air’s wide region, ‘Therewith give broad space to the Sacrificer for his enrich- ment: Cumfort thou the giver.
34 Auspicious are ye, conquerors of Vritra, formed for bestow- ing wealth, the Immortal’s Consorts. Lead to the Gods this sacrifice, Divine Onest and at our in- vitation drink of Soma. :
35 Be not afraid; shake not with terror. Take thou strength. Ye two Bowls, being firm, stay firm, and take ye strength. Mishap—not Soma—hath been killed.
36 East, west, north, south, from every side to meet thee let the regions run, Fill him, © Mother, let the noble meet together.
