‘Wits stedfast site and birthplace thou art stedfast: settle thon duly in thy stedfast birthplace, rejoicing in the Ukhya’s first appearance. Here let the Asvins, the Adhvaryus, seat thee.
seat of earth be seated. Let Rudras, Vasus welcome thee with praises ; fill full these prayers for our propitious fortuue. Here let the Asvins, the Adhvaryus, seat thee.
3 Here, Guard of Strength, with thine own powers be seated for the Gods’ happiness and great enjoyment. Even as a father to his son, be friendly: with easy entrance enter with thy body. Here let the Agvins, the aon seut thee:
4 Thou art the filling-stuff of earth called Apsas. May all the Gods celebrate thee with praises. Enriched with songs of praise, Prishthas and butter, sit here and give us wealth with ‘store of children. Here let the Aavins, etc.
5 Upon the back of Aditi I lay thee the sky’s supporter, pillar of the Quarters, Queen over creatures, Wave and drop of ‘waters art thon} and Vigvakarman ia thy Rishi.
6 Sukra and Suchi, seasons, both, of summer—thou art the innermost cement of Agni. May Heaven and Earth, may Waters, Plants and Agnis help, separate, uccordant, my precedence. Let all the Agnis ’twixt the earth and heaven gather together round these summer seasons, as the Gods gather in their hosts round Indra, Firm, with that Deity, Angiras-like, be seated,
7 Associate with the Seasons; with the Modes with the Gods, with the health-establiching Gode—may the Agvins the Adhvaryus settle thee here for Agni Vaigvanara. Associate... ith the Vasus, eto. Associate... with the Rudras, ete. Associate. with the Adityas, etc. Associate... with the Visvedevas, etc.
8 Guard thou my breath. Guard my out-breathing. Guard my through-breathing. Illume mine eye with far- Teach ing vision, Give power of hearing to mine ear. Pour forth watera, Quicken plants, Protect bipeds. Protect quadrupeds, Send rain from heaven.
9 The head is vital vigour, Prajapati beonme the metre. Royalty is vital vigour, health-giviug metre. The Supporter is vital vigour, the Sovran Lord the metre. Vigvakarman is vital vigour, Parameshthin the metre The he- goat is vital vigour, excellent the metre. ‘I'he bull is vital vigour, extensive the metre. is vital vigour, lauguid the metre. The tiger is vital vigour, invincible the metre. The lion is vital vigour, covering the metre. The four-year bull is vital vigour, Byihati the metre. The ox is vital vigour, Kakup the metre. The steer is vital vigour, Sato- brihati the metre.
10 The bullock is vital vigour, Pankti the metre. The milch- cow is vital vigour, Jagati the metre. The eighteen- month calf is vital vigour, Trisbtup the metre. The two year old steer is vital vigour, Viraj the metre, The thirty- month old ewe is vital vigour, Gayatri the metre, The three year old steer is vital vigour, Ushnih the metre. The four year old ox is vital vigour, Anushtup the metre. Fill up the room, etc. The dappled kine, eto. All sacred songs, etc. are three texts repeated from XII. 54—56, See also XIII. 58.
11 Indra and Agni, in its place securely set the unshaking brick. Thou with thy back sunderest heaven and the broad earth aud firmament.
12 Qu the air’s back let Vigvakarman set thee, thee the capa- cious, thee the far-extended. Control the air, fix firm the air, do thou the air no injury. For all breath, out-breath, through-breath, upward breath- ing, for high position, for prescribed observance, May Vayu keep thee safe with great well-being, with secur est shelter. In the manner of Angiras, with that Deity, lie steady. 7
13 Queen art thou, Quarter of the East. Wide-raler, Quarter’. of the South. West Quarter, thou art Sovran. Thow Autocrat, Quarter of the North. Queen Paramount art thou, the Lofty Point. .
14 On the air’s back may Vigvakarman set thee luminous. Control all light for all breath, for out-breath, up-breath, through-breath. Thy Lord is Vayu, with that Deity, Angiras-like, lie firm.
15 Two Rainy Seasons, Nabhas and Nabhasya—thou art the innermost cement of Agni, etc. (as in XIII. 25), cae of the first layer. Unehaking brick: the central porous brisk whieh represents the layer. Thou : the brick is addressed.
18 He lays down five Disyts or Regional bricks on the store the Vaievadevt bricks of the second layer, with a formula Lofty Point: the renith, iyotis brick of the second layer. Air's representing mid-air as the first represents the earth. Banas Mint aod Misty; Joly-Auguat and August-September. ‘The res of the formula is repeated from XIII most cement of Agui, ete.
17 Preserve my life. Preserve my breath. Guard mine out- breath. Preserve mine eyes. Preserve mine ears. Strengthen my voice. Quicken my mind. Preserve my self. Vouchsafe me light.
18 Ma metre. Pram& metre. Pratim& metre. Asrivayas metre. Pankti metre. Ushnih metre. Brihati metre. Anushtup metre. Virdj metre, Gayatri metre. Trishtup metre. Jayati metre,
19 Earth metre. Sky metre. Heaven metre. Years metre. Nakshatras metre. Vak metre. Mind metre, Husbandry metre. Gold metre. Cow metre. She-goat metre. Horse metre.
20 The Deity Agni. The Deity Vata. The Deity Sarya. The Deity Moon, The Deity Vusus. The Deity Rudras. The Deity Adityas The Deity Murute, The Deity Visvedevas. The Deity Bribaspatii The Deity Indra. The Deity Varuna.
21 Chief art thon, bright, supporting, firm, thou art the great sustainer, Earth. Thee for life, thee for lustre, thee for tillage, thee for peace and rest,
22 Controller, brilliant art thou, managing controller, firm sus- taiuer. For strength, for energy thee, for riches thee, for prosperity thee. Fill up the room, ete. The dappled kine, etc. All satred songs, etc. (as in 10).
23 The Swift, the triple praise-song. The Shining, the Paficha- daga hymn. Heaven, the Saptadaga. ‘I'he Supporter, the Ekavimga. Speed, the Ashtadaga, Ardour, the Nuvadaga. Triumphant Onset, Savimsa, Vigour, Dvavimga. Main- tenance, Trayovimga. Womb, Chaturvimga. Embryos, Pafichavimga, Energy, the Trinava, Intention, the Ek trimga. The Basis, the Trayastrimga. The Bright One’ Station, the Chatustrimsa. The Vault of Heaven, the Shattrimga. The Revolving One, the Ashtachatvarimea. ‘The Support, the Four-divisioned praise-song.
24 Thou art the portion of Agni, chief control of Consecration. The Priesthood is saved ; the Trivrit Stoma, Thou art the portion of Indra, the sovranty of Vishnu. The Nobility is saved ; the Pafichadaga Stoma. Thou art the share of the Man-beholders;; the supremacy of the Creator; the birthplace is saved; the Saptadaga Stoma. Thou art the share of Mitra, the sovranty of Varuna. Rain of heaven and wind are saved; the Ekavimga Stoma.
25 Thou art the share of the Vasus, the sovranty of the Rudras, Quadrupeds are saved ; the Chaturvimsa Stoma. Thou art the share of the Adityas; the sovranty of the Ma- ruts, The Embryos are saved ; the Panchavimea Stoma. Thou art the share of Aditi; the sovranty of Pdshan. Strength is saved ; the Trinava Stoma. Thou art the share of God Savitar; the sovranty of Bri- haspati. “The universal Quarters are saved ; the Chatush- toma Stoma. :
26 Thou art the share of the Yavas; the sovranty of the Aya- ‘vag. Creatures are saved; the Chatuschatvarimga Stoma, Thou art the share of the Ribbus; the sovranty of the Vig- vedevas. The Being is saved ; the ‘Trayastrimga Stoma,
27 Sahas, Sahasya, the two Winter Seasons—thou art the inner- most cement of Agni, eto, (as in XIII, 25).
