PurusHs bath a thousand heads, a thousand eyes, a thou- sand feet. Pervading earth on every side he fills a space ten fingers broad.
shall be ; Lord, too, of immortality which waxes greater still by food.
3 So mighty in his grandeur; yea, greater than this is Parusha. All creatures are one fourth of him, three fourths eternal life in heaven, What was his mouth? what were his arms? what are the names of thighs and feet?
11 The Brabman- was his mouth, of both his arms wag the Rajanya made. His thighs became the Vaisya, from his feet the Sddra was produced.
12 The Moon was gendered from his mind, and from his eye the Sun had birth ; Vayu and Prana from hisear, and from his mouth was Agni born. 13° Forth from bis navel came mid-air ; the sky was fashioned from his head ; Earth from his feet, and from his ear the Quarters. Thus they formed the worlds. .
14 When Gods performed the sacrifice with Purusha as offering Spring was the butter, Autumn the oblation, Summer was the wood.
15 Then seven were his enclosing-sticks, his kindling-brands were three times seven, When Gods, performing sacrifice, bound as their victim Purusha.
16 Gods, sacrificing, sacrificed the victim: these were the earli- est holy ordinances, The Mighty Ones attained the height of heaven, there where the Sathyas, Gods of old, are dwelling.
17 Inthe beginning he was formed, collected from waters, earth, and Vigvakarman’s essence, Fixing the form thereof Tvashtar proceedeth. This was at first. the mortal’s birth and godhead.
18 I know this mighty Purusha whose colour is like the Sun, beyond the rexch of darkness. He only who knows him leaves Death behind him. There is no path save this alone to travel.
19 In the womb moves Prajapati: he, never becoming boru, is born iu sundry figures. The wise discern the womb from which he springeth. In him alone stand all existing creatures.
20 He who gives light and heat to Gods, first, foremost Ageut of the Goda, Born ere the Gods—to him the bright, the holy One, be reverence }
21 Thus spake the Gods at first, as they begat the bright and holy One: The Brahmay who may know thee thus shall have the Gods in his control.
