9 Birth-place art thou of Agni. Ye are sprinklers. Thou art
Urvagi, Thou art Ayu. Thou art Purdravas. T rub and churn thee with Gayatri metre. I rub and ehurn thee with the Trishtup metre. I rub and churn thiee with the Jagati metre.
3 Be ye for us one-minded, be one-thoughted, free from spot and stain. Harm not the sacrifice, harm not the sacrifice’s lord. Be kind to us this day, Omniscient Ones!
4 Proserver from the ourse, Son of the Rishis, Agni is active hating entered Agni. Hore for ua kindly with fair worship offer oblation to the Gods with care unceasing. Svahi! & For him who flies around and rashes onward I take thee, for Tandnapat the mighty, the very strong, of all-surpass- ing vigour. Verses 1—4 contain formulas for the Atith: i on and. Entertainment of Soma when oe eke ie thecoctiical hat of eblation, from the cart, and addresses it with the furmala Thew: the sacred food, Vial: meaning, secording to Mahkihars, Some the pervader Strength of the Gods, inviolate, inviolable still art thou, the strength that turns the curse away, uncursed and never to be cursed. May I go straight to truth. Place me in comfort.
60 Agni, Guardian of the Vow, O Guardian of the Vow, in thee ‘Whatever form there is of thine, may that same form be here on me: on thee be every form of mine. O Lord of Vows, let our vows be united. May Diksh4’s Lord allow my Consecration, may holy Fervour's Lord approve my Fervour.
7 May every stalk of thine wax full and strengthen for Indra Ekadhanavid, God Soma! May Indra grow in strength for thee: for Indra mayest thou grow strong. Increase us friends with strength and mental vigour. May all prosperity be thine, God Soma. May I attain the solemn Soma-pressing. May longed-for wealth come forth for strength and fortune, Let there be truth for those whose speech is truthful. To Heaven and Earth be adoration offered.
8 That noblest body which is thine, O Agni, laid in the lowest deep, encased in iron, hath chased the awful word, the word of terror, Svahi! That noblest. ..... encased in silver, etc. Svahi! ‘That noblest . . . . with gold around it, ete. Svaha!
9 For me thou art the home of the afflicted. For me thou art the gathering-place of riches, Protect me from the woe of destitution. Protect me from the state of perturbation. May Agni know thee, he whose name is Nabhas. Go, Agni, Angiras, with the name of Ayu, Thou whom this earth containeth, down I lay thee with each inviolate holy name thou bearest. Thou whom the second earth, etc, Thou whom the third earth, etc. Thee, further, for the Gods’ delight.
10 A foe-subduing lioness art thou: be fitted for the Gods. A foe-subduing lioness art thou : be purified for Gods. * A foe-subduing lioness art thou : adorn thyself for Gods.
11 Indra’s shout guard thee in the front with Vasus, The Wise Oue guard thee from the rear with Rudras. The Thought- swift guard thee on the right with Fathers. The Omnific guard thee, leftward, with Adityas. This heated water I eject and banish from the sacrifice.
12 Thou art a liouess, All-hail! Thou art a lioness winning Adityas.  All-hail ! . Thou art a lioness winning Brahmans and Nobles. All-hail! ‘Thou art a lioness that wins fair offepring, win abundant wealth, All-bail ! A lioness art thou. Bying the Gods hither for him who offers sacrifice. All-hail! To living creatures, thee. for ite construction are now marked out. Thou: ,the 2 earth dug out of the pit.. Nabhas: or, Vapour. Ayu: name of Agni. Before this address to Agni, the Adi a throws the Sphya or wooden sword to the place where the pitistobe dug. Thou whom: O Agni, who art in this loose dug earth which Fecatter on the place where the high altar is to be. Second, . . . third: the ceremony aud he formula are repeated with these eubstitutions for ‘this.’ “Thee, further: he takes up earth a fourth time. sprinkles it. moral Governor of the world, from whom no secrets are hid. ‘Phe Thought- noift: Yama, God of the Departed, The Omnific: Visvakarman, an abstract deity representing the Supreme God as Creator of all things. Heated water: after having sprinkled waters on four sides he pours away the rest outside the altar place.
12 With four invocations he pours butter on the four corners of the altar place, and with the fifth on the centre.. Thee: the offering-ladte. ‘I raise’ understood,
13 ‘Firm art thou, steady thou the earth. Firm-seated art thou, steady thou the air. Movelessly set art thou, steady the sky. Agni’s completion art thou,
14 Tho priests of him the lofty Priest well-skilled in hymos harness their spirits, yea harness their holy thoughts. He only knowing works assigns their Priest tasks. Yea, lofty is the praise of Savitar the God. All-hail !
15 Forth through This All strode Vishnu: thrice bis foot he planted, and the whole was gathered in his footstep’s dust. All-hail !
16 Rich in sweet food be ye, and rich in milch-kine, with fer- tile pastures, fain td do men service. Both these worlds, Vishnu, hast thou stayed asunder, and firmly fixed the earth with pegs around it.
17 Heard by the Gods, ye twain, to Gods proclaim it. Go eastward, O ye twain, proclaiming worship. Swerve yo not: bear the sacrifice straight upward. To your own cow-pen speak, ye godlike dwellings. Speak not away my life, speak not away my children. On the earth’s summit here may ye be joyful.
18 Now will I tell the mighty deeds of Vishnu, of him who measured out the earthly regions. Who propped the highest place of congregation, thrice set- ting down his foot and widely striding. For Vishnu thee.
19 Either from heaven or from the earth, O Vishnu, or, Vishnu, from the vast wide air’s mid-region, Fill both thy hands full with abundant riches, and from the right and from the left bestow them. For Vishnu thee.
20 For this his mighty deed is Vishnu lauded, like some wild beast, dread, prowling, mountain-roaming, He within whose three wide-extended paces all living crea- tures have their habitation.
21 Thou art the frontlet for the brow of Vishnu. Ye are the corners of the mouth of Vishnu. Thou art the needle for the work of Vishnu, Thou art the firmly-fastened knot of Vishnu. To Vishnu thou belongest. Thee for Vishnu.
22 By impulse of God Savitars I take thee with arms of Asvius and with hands of Pashan. Thon art a woman. Here I cut the necks of Rakshasas away. Mighty art thou, mighty the sound thou makest. Utter thy mighty-sounding voice to Indra:
23 Fiend-killing, charm-destroying voice of Vishnu. Here I cast out that charm of magic power which stranger or housemate for me hath buried. hand or southward at andrei the toxt taken from R.V.1. 164. 1, Thee: *T support’ reciting the text from Atharva-veda, VII. 26. recites the text from R. V. I. 154.2. Paces: see verse 18. the ends of the band of grass. Needle: ‘sewer’: Eggeling. This is a wooden peg used in stitching together the folding doors (‘liurdles'; Rggeling) of the cart-shed. Knot he ties the string in a knot. Thou belongest : he touches the completed shed. Thee : ‘I touch ’ understood. holes made in the earth to inoreme the noise of the pressing or pounding of the Soma, Thee: a wooden digging instrument, a trowel or short spade. Woman ; connected asa helper with the men who manage the ceremony. Moreover, the word aBhri, spade, is feminine. Here: he draws outlines of the holes, Razshasas: the maliguant fiends who would mar or obstruct the sacrifice. Mighty : he addresses each hole that he has dug. Utter: when thou art made use of at the Soma pounding. magic power ; valagay a collection of bones, nails, hair, etc., tied up in a Here I cast out the charm of mayic power buried for me by equal or unequal. Here J cast out the charm that hath been buried for me by nor-relation or relation. T cast the charm of magic out.
24 Selfé-ruler art thou, conquering foes. Ruler for ever art thou, killing enemies. Men’s ruler art thou, slaying fiends. All ruler, killing foes, art thou.
25 [sprinkle you whom Vishnu owns, killers of fiends aud evil charms. I lay down you whom Vishnu loves, killers of fiends and wicked charms. I scatter you whom Vishnu loves, killers of fiends and wicked charms, You two whom Vishnu loves, who kill fiends and {Il charms do I lay down. You two whom Vishnu loves, who kill fiends and ill charms I compass round. To Vishnu thou belongest. Ye are Vishnu’s.
26 By impulse of God Savitar I take thee with arms of Agvins, with the hands of Pisban. Thou art a womau. Here I cut the necks of Rakshasas away. Barley art thou. Bar off from us onr haters, bar our enemies. Thee fur heaven, thee for earth, thee for air’s region. Pure be the worlds, the Fathers’ dwelling-places. Thou art the habitation of the Fathers. Piece of old matting or cluth, and buried arin~leep in the ground to injure uemiee, Seo The Hymns of the, Atharva-veda, X. 2-18. and note, ‘The digger of these sound-holes dislodges by his act any such charms ss have been buried there, cnd recites a formula as he throws up the earth from each hole, completed holes, with a formula for each. boards, one on each of two pits. J scutter: blades of Darbha gras, You feo: the prowing-boards. 1 compute round: with earth to keep them steady. akin used in the Soma-pressing process. Ye: the five eae eau which belong to Vishgu as guardiaa of the saocifce, merata) in the centre of the Sadas or shed where the priests ait. By im- pulse, ete, : two lines repeated from verse 22. He throws barley into the spriukling-water. Barley yara. Bar of: yavaya. There is « play on the words. Thee for heaven: he wpriukles the top of the branch. For earth: The bottom ar aire region : the middle, Pure be the worlds: he pours the remaining water into the hole made for the branch. Thou: a layer of Darbha grass which he strews in the hole,
27 Prop heaven, fill full the air, on earth stand firmly. Dyuténa, offspring of the Maruts, plant thee !, Mitra and Varuna with firm upholding. : Iclose thee in, thon winner of the Bréhmans, winner of Nobles and abundant riches. Strengthen the Brahmans, strengthen thou the Nobles, strengthen our vital power, strengthen our offspring.
28 Firm-set art thou. Firm be this Sacrificer within this home with offspring and with cattle. O Heaven and Earth, be ye filled full of fatness. Indra’s mat art thou, shelter of all people.
29 Lover of song, may these our songs encompase thee on every id side; Strengthening thee of lengthened life, may they be dear delights to thee.
30 Thou art the needle for the work of Indra. Thou art the firmly fastened knot of Indra. Indra’s art thon. Thou art the Visvedevas’.
31 All-present art thou, carrying off. Oblation-bearing priest art thou. Thou art the Swift, the Very Wise. Tutha art thou, who knoweth all.
32 Thou art the yearning one, the sage, Anghari, Bambbiri art thou. Aid-seeker art thou, worshipping. Cleanser art thou, the cleansing-place. Krisinu, Sovran Lord, art thou. Thou art the Pavamana of the assembly. Thou art the welkin ever moving forward. Swept clean art thou, preparer of oblations, Thou art the seat of Law, heaven’s light and lustre.
33 A sea art thou of all-embracing compass. Aja art thou, who hath one foot to bear him. ‘Thou art the Dragon of the Depths of ocean. Speech art thou, thou the Sadas, thou art Indra’s. Doors of the sacrifice, do not distress me ! Lord, Ruler of the pathways, lead me onward, In this God- reaching path may I be happy.
34 Look ye upon me with the eye of Mitra, O Agnis, ye, receivers of oblations, are by a lauded name lauded together. Protect me, Agnis! with your glittering army. Fill me with riches, Agnis! be my keepers. To you be adoration. Do not harm me,
35 Thou art a light that wears all forms and figures, serving the general host of Gods as Kindler. Thou, Soma, wilt withhold thy wide protection from body- wounding hatreds shown by others, All-hail ! Let the Swift graciously enjoy the butter. All-hail !
36 By goodly paths lead us to riches, Agni, thou God whe knowest every sacred duty. Remove the sin that makes us stray aud wander: most ample adoration will we bring thee.
37 Wide room and comfort may this Agui give us, and go be- fore us cleaving down our foemen. May he win booty in the fight for booty: May he quell foes in his triumphant onset.
38 O Vishnu, stride thou widely forth, give ample room for our abode. Drink butter, homed in butter! Still speed on the sacri- fice’s lord. All-hail ! # To thea, God Savitar, belongs this Soma, Guard him secure- ly : let not demons harm thee. Now hast thou joined the Gods as God, God Soma: men have ‘I joived bere through abundant riches. All-hail! from Varuna’s noose am I delivered.
40 O Agni, Guardian of the Vow, O Guardian of the Vow, on me whatever form of thiue hath been, may that same form be upon thee. Whatever form of mine hath beeu on thee, may that be here on me. O Lord of Vows, our vows have been accomplished. Diksha’s Lord hath approved my Consecration, and holy Fervour’s Lord allowed my Fervour.
41 O Vishnu, stride thou widely forth, make ample room for our Drink butter, homed in butter! Still speed on the sacrifice’s lord. All-hail !
42 I have passed others, not approached to others. On the near side of those that were more distant, and farther than the nearer have I found thee. So, for the worship of the Gods, with gladness we welcome thee God, Sovran of the Forest! Let the Gods welcome thee for the Gods’ service, For Vishnu thee. Plant, guard! Are, do not harm it !
